

===== PAGE 1 =====

International Journal of Geographical Information
Science
ISSN: 1365-8816 (Print) 1362-3087 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tgis20
A multi-source spatio-temporal data cube for
large-scale geospatial analysis
Fan Gao, Peng Yue, Zhipeng Cao, Shuaifeng Zhao, Boyi Shangguan, Liangcun
Jiang, Lei Hu, Zhe Fang & Zheheng Liang
To cite this article: Fan Gao, Peng Yue, Zhipeng Cao, Shuaifeng Zhao, Boyi Shangguan,
Liangcun Jiang, Lei Hu, Zhe Fang & Zheheng Liang (2022) A multi-source spatio-temporal data
cube for large-scale geospatial analysis, International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 36:9, 1853-1884, DOI: 10.1080/13658816.2022.2087222
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2022.2087222
Published online: 14 Jun 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2206
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 42 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tgis20

===== PAGE 2 =====

RESEARCH ARTICLE
A multi-source spatio-temporal data cube for large-scale
geospatial analysis
Fan Gao a, Peng Yue a,b,c , Zhipeng Cao a, Shuaifeng Zhao a,
Boyi Shangguan a, Liangcun Jiang a, Lei Hu a, Zhe Fang a and Zheheng Liang d
aSchool of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China;
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Geospatial Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China; cHubei Province
Engineering Center for Intelligent Geoprocessing (HPECIG), Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China;
dSouth Digital Technology Co, Ltd., Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
ABSTRACT
Data management and analysis are challenging with big Earth
observation (EO) data. Expanding upon the rising promises of
data cubes for analysis-ready big EO data, we propose a new geo-
spatial infrastructure layered over a data cube to facilitate big EO
data management and analysis. Compared to previous work on
data cubes, the proposed infrastructure, GeoCube, extends the
capacity of data cubes to multi-source big vector and raster data.
GeoCube is developed in terms of three major efforts: formalize
cube dimensions for multi-source geospatial data, process geo-
spatial data query along these dimensions, and organize cube
data for high-performance geoprocessing. This strategy improves
EO data cube management and keeps connections with the busi-
ness intelligence cube, which provides supplementary information
for EO data cube processing. The paper highlights the major
efforts and key research contributions to online analytical process-
ing for dimension formalization, distributed cube objects for tiles,
and artificial intelligence enabled prediction of computational
intensity for data cube processing. Case studies with data from
Landsat, Gaofen, and OpenStreetMap demonstrate the capabilities
and applicability of the proposed infrastructure.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 23 July 2021
Accepted 5 June 2022
KEYWORDS
Data cube; high-
performance computing;
earth observation; cloud
computing; artificial
intelligence
1. Introduction
Earth observation (EO) data, a prime source of big data, comprise large-scale and
multi-source geospatial data that are acquired from orbital sensors, in-situ measure-
ments, and simulation models (Baumann et al . 2018, Wagemann et al . 2018). The man-
agement of EO data is challenging owing to the demand for the integration of
multiple data sources, high-performance processing, and diverse applications of EO
data. These multi-source EO data are characterized by the difference in spatial, tem-
poral, and spectral resolutions, varying conditions in observations (e.g. different atmos-
pheric conditions and viewing geometries), and diverse spatial data structures (e.g.
CONTACT Peng Yue pyue@whu.edu.cn
/C2232022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE
2022, VOL. 36, NO. 9, 1853 –1884
https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2022.2087222

===== PAGE 3 =====

raster and vector data) (Lewis et al . 2016). These characteristics make EO data integra-
tion, storage, and processing a challenging topic.
Recent advances in information infrastructures have shown significant promises for
EO data processing (Yue et al . 2016, Sudmanns et al . 2019)( Figure 1 ). Several para-
digm shifts occurred in the EO domain between the 1990s and 2000s. In the local
processing paradigm, EO data are often downloaded from data portals and processed
in local machines. This may result in high network bandwidth resources and time
costs. The capabilities of users are limited in solving large-scale geospatial problems
owing to insufficient local storage space and computing power (Wulder and Coops
2014, Kopp et al . 2019). The development of Web technologies and geospatial Web
services has made it possible for users to discover, access, and process geospatial data
on spatial data infrastructure with ease (Zhao et al . 2012). Examples include the
Geospatial Interactive Online Visualization and Analysis Infrastructure that was devel-
oped by the Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information Services Center (Berrick
et al . 2009), and Grid Processing on Demand System that was developed by European
Space Agency (ESA 2012). Users can customize data products using scientific work-
flows that are composed of geospatial Web services such as data services, sensor Web
services, and processing services. Geospatial data can be accessed via the Internet in
an interoperable manner, and the processing can be migrated to remote servers
instead of being performed on local machines (Yue et al . 2010). This is known as the
service-oriented processing paradigm. In recent years, the analysis-ready pattern has
emerged as a revolutionary paradigm for big geospatial data processing (Gorelick
et al . 2017, CEOS 2021). It requires EO data to be preprocessed into an analysis-ready
form, following which the Cyberinfrastructure is harnessed to make the data available
to users. Analysis-ready data (ARD) means that the EO data are processed following a
minimum set of requirements, thereby enabling immediate analysis with a minimal
additional user effort and interoperability (Lewis et al . 2018). ARD can be incorporated
into a geospatial data cube, which makes big EO data more accessible and enables
Figure 1. Paradigm shift in EO processing.
1854 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 4 =====

large-scale analysis with high-performance computing (HPC) technologies (e.g. parallel
computing or cloud computing).
This study presents a cube infrastructure for big geospatial data analysis. In
comparison with existing cube approaches, the infrastructure emphasizes the
accommodation of multi-source geospatial data, including raster and vector data in
the cube, cube tile processing with cloud computing, and artificial intelligence (AI)
machine learning-enabled cube computation. AI-enabled cube computation refers
to the use of AI for predicting the computational intensity (CI) of parallel cube
processing tasks, which aids in improving the load balance performance. The
design and implementation of the cube infrastructure, which is known as GeoCube,
are detailed in this paper. It covers the ingestion and management of multi-source
geospatial data in the cube, geospatial data querying and access along different
cube dimensions, and high-performance cube computing of large-scale geospatial
datasets. The development of such a geospatial data cube can contribute to
advancing the EO data cube approach, as well as keep connections with the busi-
ness intelligence (BI) cube.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the back-
ground and related work. The proposed method is described in Section 3 . The imple-
mentation and evaluation of GeoCube are detailed in Section 4 . Section 5 presents a
discussion and Section 6 concludes the study.
2. Background and related work
2.1. Data cube concept
The term ‘data cube ’ originates from the BI domain. As a data cube generally refers to
an array of multiple dimensions that facilitates online analytics, it is also known as an
online analytical processing (OLAP) cube (Gray et al . 1997). The OLAP cube was intro-
duced into the geospatial domain to accommodate spatial entities in vector data by
adding the spatial dimension and spatial measure, thereby promoting OLAP to spatial
OLAP (SOLAP) (Han et al . 1998). In recent years, this term has been used in the EO
domain to refer to a time-series multi-dimensional array ( Table 1 ). It has been incorpo-
rated into Cyberinfrastructure to create EO data cube infrastructure, which facilitates
EO data management, access, analysis, visualization, and interoperability. Table 1 lists
several typical definitions of data cube, covering definitions from the OLAP, SOLAP,
array database (Baumann 2017), Earth Science Informatics (Nativi et al . 2017), and
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) (Voidrot and Percivall 2020) communities. In the
remainder of this paper, the former two are referred to as BI data cubes, whereas the
latter three are categorized as EO data cubes.
It is often recognized that EO data cubes are not similar to BI data cubes, despite
the cube concepts being similar. EO data cubes are always densely populated,
whereas BI data cubes are typically sparse, which limits the use of the OLAP approach
in EO data cubes (Strobl et al . 2017). A major challenge in bridging the two cubes is
the manner in which the data are organized in high-performance forms for efficient
cube processing. In a traditional BI data cube, a relational database is often selected
for cube management, which is possible owing to the sparse datasets. However, EO
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1855

===== PAGE 5 =====

data cubes often require higher-performance solutions. Moreover, traditional SOLAP
can accommodate vector data, whereas EO data cubes focus on raster data. It is pos-
sible to extend the spatial dimension and spatial measure into EO data cubes to
enable cube analysis on multi-source datasets. Thus, it is necessary to investigate
approaches for bridging EO and BI data cubes by augmenting cubes with multi-source
geospatial data ingestion and management, and performing cube processing of joint
data analysis between dense data (EO data) and sparse data (vector or tabular data).
Therefore, in this study, the geospatial data cube is understood as a time-series multi-
dimensional data model, in which multi-source geospatial data can be organized as
spatially aligned ARD in a high-performance form. Multi-source geospatial data are not
limited to EO data, such as remote sensing images, but also can be vector, trajectory,
point cloud, or tabular data. The geospatial data cube makes big EO data more access-
ible and enables large-scale analysis using HPC technologies.
2.2. BI data cube
The BI data cube was first introduced by Gray et al .( 1997) for business data manage-
ment, and it represents business data in the form of a multi-dimensional array using
concepts such as the dimension, measure, cell, and level. A data cube is composed of
cells, which can be defined based on their dimensions and measures. The dimensions
Table 1. Several definitions of data cube.
Reference Definition
Data Cube: A Relational Aggregation Operator
Generalizing Group-By, Cross-Tab, and Sub-Totals
(Gray et al . 1997)
An OLAP cube is a multi-dimensional array of data. The
0 D data cube is a point. The 1 D data cube is a line
with a point. The 2 D data cube is a cross tab, a plane,
two lines, and a point. The 3 D data cube is a cube
with three intersecting 2 D cross tabs.
Selective materialization: An efficient method
for spatial data cube construction
(Han et al . 1998)
A spatial data cube is a subject-oriented, integrated, time-
variant, and non-volatile collection of both spatial and
nonspatial data, which consists of both spatial and
nonspatial dimensions and measures.
The Datacube Manifesto (Baumann 2017) A datacube is a massive multi-dimensional array, also
called ‘raster data ’ or ‘gridded data ’; ‘massive’ entails
that we talk about sizes significantly beyond the main
memory resources of the server hardware. Data values,
all of the same data type, sit at grid points as defined
by the d axes of the d-dimensional datacube.
Coordinates along these axes allow addressing data
values unambiguously. A d-dimensional grid is
characterized by the fact that each inner grid point has
exactly two neighbors along each direction; border grid
points have just one.
A view-based model of data-cube to support big earth
data systems interoperability (Nativi et al . 2017)
A time series multidimensional (space, time, data type)
stack of spatially aligned pixel ready for analysis.
OGC Geospatial Coverages Data Cube Community
Practice (Voidrot and Percivall 2020)
A multi-dimensional ( ‘n-D’) array of values. Even though it
is called a ’cube’, it can be 1-dimensional, 2-
dimensional, 3-dimensional, or higher-dimensional. The
dimensions may be coordinates or enumerations, e.g.
categories. A geospatial data cube is a data cube
established on basis of a coverage with a specific grid
system for geospatial data with at least one dimension
of spatial or temporal definition.
1856 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 6 =====

represent the analysis axes and a measure is a numerical variable that is identified by
a combination of dimensions. A dimension can be organized into levels hierarchically,
with each level corresponding to a different granularity for that dimension (Damiani
and Spaccapietra 2008). Considering a marketing sales example, a set of dimensions
can be defined, such as the location, time, and product type. The measure can be
defined by the values of the sales. Thus, it can be identified using the location, time,
and product type dimensions. Among these dimensions, the time dimension can be
represented by different levels, such as day, month, and year, so that the values of the
sales can be aggregated along the dimension (Rivest et al . 2001).
A BI data cube is always used with the OLAP approach. OLAP can store different
cube versions of a dataset at different aggregation levels, thereby providing complex
and fast aggregation processes to summarize the data (Kasprzyk and Devillet 2021).
OLAP defines several operations for users to explore a data cube (Chaudhuri and
Dayal 1997):
/C15 trim and slice, which performs data selection along dimensions;
/C15 roll up, which moves up along one or more dimensions towards more aggre-
gated data;
/C15 drill down, which moves down along one or more dimensions towards more
detailed data; and
/C15 pivot, which reorients the data cube for a different view.
Spatial attribute is an important dimension of geospatial data. The straightforward
use of an OLAP dimension as a spatial dimension cannot support the aggregation
processes of spatial entities. Therefore, SOLAP was proposed, which defines the mean-
ings of the spatial dimension and spatial measure (Han et al . 1998). The spatial dimen-
sion is associated with a geometric entity, which may have different spatial
granularities, such as country, province, and city. A spatial measure is a collection of
pointers for the spatial entities (Han et al . 1998, Bimonte et al . 2010). Thus, the spatial
dimension is similar to a spatial index, whereas the spatial measure is similar to a col-
lection of spatial features. Such a model makes it possible to perform spatial aggrega-
tion functions, such as intersection and union, by means of which a set of geometries
can be returned from the spatial measure (Silva et al . 2008).
OLAP provides multiple methods for implementing data cubes in databases. The
most commonly used methods are the star, snowflake, and fact constellation schemas
(Chaudhuri and Dayal 1997). In the star schema, the data cube is represented as a
star, the center of the star is a fact (i.e. measures in cube cells) table, and the points
surrounding the star consist of dimension tables (Kimball and Ross 2011). Although
the star schema is the simplest implementation of the data cube model in a database,
it cannot explicitly support dimension hierarchies. Therefore, the snowflake schema
was developed to refine the star schema. In the snowflake schema, the dimension
hierarchy can be represented by normalizing the dimension tables. The fact constella-
tion schema is more flexible because it allows multiple fact tables to share the dimen-
sion tables in a database (Chaudhuri and Dayal 1997). In this manner, it provides the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1857

===== PAGE 7 =====

possibility of implementing a data cube consisting of multi-source and heterogeneous
geospatial data that share several common dimensions.
2.3. EO data cube
Data cubes have gained increasing attentions in recent years and have exhibited great
promise in the EO domain for extracting useful information from big EO data
(Baumann et al . 2016, Giuliani et al . 2017, Sudmanns et al . 2019, Schramm et al . 2021).
An EO data cube can be defined as a time-series multi-dimensional (space, time, and
data type) stack of spatially aligned pixels that are ready for analysis (Nativi et al .
2017). Although existing EO data cubes focus on images, in this study, the cube con-
cept is extended to cover other geospatial data sources, such as vector data, thereby
providing a multi-source geospatial data cube.
Table 2 presents a comparison of three typical EO data cubes and the proposed
GeoCube. The EarthServer data cube was created using the Rasdaman Array Database
system (Baumann et al . 1999). It supports intercontinental-scale data management, ad-
hoc extraction, and processing (Baumann et al . 2016, 2018). The cube can use either
the PostgreSQL database or file systems to store data, although the PostgreSQL option
has recently been deprecated. The metadata are represented using the OGC
Geography Markup Language Coverages (GMLCOV) specification, which is stored in
PostgreSQL or SQLite. Multiple data indexing methods are supported, such as the
R þ tree and regular computed index. The EarthServer data cube supports the Web
service interface that is provided by the Petascope on top of Rasdaman, including the
OGC Web Coverage Service (WCS) and Web Coverage Processing Service (WCPS).
Table 2. Comparison of different data cubes.
EarthServer
data cube Open data cube Earth system data cube GeoCube
Data source Raster data Raster data Raster data Raster data/
vector data
Spatial OLAP No No No Yes
Computing pattern HPC HPC HPC HPC/AI-enabled
computational
intensity
prediction
Data organization Raster tile Raster tile Raster tile Raster tile/vector tile
Metadata PostgreSQL/SQLite
(GMLCOV model)
PostgreSQL (JSONB) File system (config file) PostgreSQL (fact
constellation
schema)
Array-based
interface provided
Yes Yes Yes Yes
Data indexing Tile indexing Scene and tile indexing Tile indexing Tile indexing
Data ingestion Mandatory Optional Mandatory Mandatory
User interaction WCS/WCPS,
rasql,
Cþþ/Java/R/
JavaScript API
WCS/WMS/WPS,
Jupyter Notebook,
Python API
FTP/WCS,
Jupyter Notebook,
Python/Julia/R API
OGC API –
Coverages/
Processes,
OGC Data Access
and Processing
API, Jupyter
Notebook,
Scala/Python API
1858 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 8 =====

These service requests can be translated into the Rasdaman Query Language (RaSQL)
and executed in the Rasdaman database (Rasdaman 2021).
The Open Data Cube (ODC) initiative is an open-source project that was launched
by the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) (CEOS 2021, Gomes et al .
2021). The objective of the ODC is to lower technical barriers and to provide a solution
for national or local agencies to create data cubes that are similar to the Australian
geoscience data cube, Colombia data cube, and Swiss data cube (Lewis et al . 2017,
CEOS 2021). The ODC can manage large amounts of satellite data and process
national-scale or even continent-scale satellite data using HPC technologies. It allows
to store data in the original format or ingest data in a high-performance tile format.
The former adopts the traditional scene-based index, whereas the latter uses tile-based
index. The same API can be enforced on top of the two organizing forms, although
the former option was recently recommended for the ODC. The Dask parallel comput-
ing engine can be used in the ODC for parallel Earth science, satellite imagery, and
time-series analyses (Dask 2021). Unlike the Dask in the ODC, Apache Spark (Zaharia
et al . 2010) is selected for GeoCube, because it has a wider user base in open-source
cloud computing communities, with more programming languages and a comprehen-
sive software ecosystem covering Hadoop, HBase, and Geotrellis. In the ODC, the EO
data in the tile format are stored using the Network Common Data Form (NetCDF).
The metadata are encoded using the JSONB format and managed in the PostgreSQL
database (Lewis et al . 2017). Five relational tables are leveraged to manage the cube
data. Furthermore, the ODC provides the Web service interface, including the OGC
WCS, Web Map Service (WMS), and Web Processing Service (WPS) (Voidrot and
Percivall 2020).
The objective of the Earth System Data Cube (ESDC) is to explore various EO raster
data streams simultaneously to enable joint analysis. Multiple data streams are inte-
grated into a single high-dimensional data cube. The infrastructure provides the same
data cube at different spatial resolutions and chunkings to accelerate data access for
different applications (Mahecha et al . 2020). The cube data are encoded using the Zarr
format (Zarr 2021), which is a format that is optimized for cloud storage. The ESDC
uses a file system directory to organize the data, and each cube instance has a config-
uration file for describing the spatial and temporal resolution. The ESDC enables data
retrieval and downloading via file transfer protocol (FTP). Moreover, the OGC WCS and
Jupyter Notebook are supported for data access and analytics (ESDC 2021).
2.4. Contributions of the work
This study presents a new cube infrastructure for big geospatial data analysis. The
method differs from existing cube approaches in the following aspects: (1) The infra-
structure supports the accommodation of multi-source geospatial data, including ras-
ter and vector data in the cube. The multi-source data are segmented into a tile form
in a NoSQL database, ready for HPC, thereby enabling the user to perform efficient
multi-source data analysis using the high-performance tile form. (2) The infrastructure
supports large-scale and joint analysis for cube tiles using a cloud-based cube object.
It is compatible with multiple data sources, which can help solving the problem of the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1859

===== PAGE 9 =====

joint analysis of multi-source and heterogeneous geospatial data. SOLAP and EO data
cubes work together in a cloud computing environment. Cloud computing refers to
the on-demand use of storage and computing resources that are located on net-
worked computers. Existing cloud computing technologies such as Apache Spark have
been used extensively for big data processing. Apache Spark is a high-performance
cloud computing engine that was developed for data-intensive applications. It incor-
porates a data model known as the Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD), which is a
data collection that is partitioned across a set of machines for distributed computing
(Zaharia et al . 2010). The leveraging of cloud computing and this data model can sig-
nificantly improve the processing capabilities of the cube infrastructure. (3) The infra-
structure improves the load balance of parallel geoprocessing using AI. Although
cloud computing empowers the infrastructure with parallel geoprocessing capabilities,
geospatial data are heterogeneous and spatially distributed in an irregular manner,
which often leads to a load imbalance owing to the various computational intensities
of the different tiles. AI machine learning technology, which has shown potential for
the evaluation of CI (Yue et al . 2020), can be incorporated into the distributed tile
processing to improve the load balance.
3. Materials and methods
This section describes the approach for constructing the multi-source spatio-temporal
data cube for large-scale geospatial analysis. The approach includes the formalization
of cube dimensions to accommodate multi-source data ( Section 3.1 ), cube tile process-
ing using cloud computing ( Section 3.2 ), and enhanced cube computation using AI
(Section 3.3 ).
A new geospatial data cube with the following characteristics is proposed. First,
multi-source geospatial data, including raster and vector data, can be accommodated
in the cube. Four dimensions, namely time, space, product, and band, are formalized.
The multi-source data are spatially aligned and stacked in a time-series form. Thus, it
is named as a multi-source spatio-temporal data cube. The cube is developed using
the OLAP fact constellation schema, so that OLAP operations such as spatial merge,
map algebra and time-series analysis can be performed on the cube ( Section 3.1 ).
Second, cloud computing is used for processing the cube tiles. Distributed cube
objects for cube tiles are proposed to facilitate the distributed computing ( Section
3.2). Third, AI technologies are applied to enhance the load balance in the cube com-
putation. The heterogeneity of the geospatial data can be captured from a data sci-
ence perspective using AI machine learning, thereby optimizing the parallel
computing performance ( Section 3.3 ).
3.1. Cube dimension formalization
The cube dimensions are important for the development of a cube data model.
Geospatial data can be represented in multiple dimensions, such as the space, time,
and thematic properties. The model specifies several basic dimensions to accommo-
date the raster, vector, and tabular data, as illustrated in Figure 2 .
1860 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 10 =====

3.1.1. Product dimension
This dimension specifies the thematic axis for the geospatial data cube using the
product name (e.g. Landsat_8_ARD or OSM_Water), type (e.g. raster, vector or tabular),
processes, and instrument name. The product and instrument name, are linked to the
Product&Band and Instrument tables, respectively, which are used as supplementary
tables when consuming raster data. For example, the product dimension can describe
optical and SAR image products by recording information on the instrument and
band. The supplementary tables are not necessary when vector data products such as
OpenStreetMap (OSM) are considered. The processes are the functions that have been
supported and can be performed on the product. Data querying or subsetting can be
performed along the product dimension using the product name.
3.1.2. Spatial dimension
This dimension specifies the spatial axis for the geospatial data cube using the grid
code, grid type, city name, and province name. The cube uses a spatial grid for tiling
to enable data readiness in a high-performance form. The tiling for raster data involves
dividing the data into physical tiles, whereas the tiling for vector data involves index-
ing the data as logical tiles instead of a physical division, which aids in maintaining
Figure 2. Cube data model.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1861

===== PAGE 11 =====

the completeness of the vector features. The resolution of the spatial grid is customiz-
able, e.g. a 1 /C2 1 grid tile (grid size) that consists of 4000 /C2 4000 pixels (pixel size). The
grid type table is used for recoding the layout of a grid, including the grid and pixel
sizes, as well as the coordinate reference system (CRS). The CRS may be the World
Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 84) or a projected coordinate reference system such as
the Universal Transverse Mercator, depending on user specification. A grid code is
assigned to each tile to enable the indexing of the grid tiles. The code follows Z-order
curve-based encoding so that contiguous tiles are assigned to the same node, and
thus, the query and computing performance can be improved owing to the reduced
communication cost. When a bounding box query is considered, the grids with which
the bounding box intersects will be determined first, following which the grids that
are encoded using the Z-order curve can be found in the database. The tile data that
are identified by the grid codes are often located in the same node. The city and prov-
ince names can be used to support certain OLAP aggregation operations.
3.1.3. Temporal dimension
This dimension specifies the temporal axis for the geospatial data using the phenom-
enon time and result time. The phenomenon time is the time when the observation is
captured such as the acquisition time for satellite imagery and the update time for
vector and tabular data, whereas the result time is the time when the result becomes
available once all processing steps have been completed. Data querying or subsetting
along the temporal dimension can be performed using the phenomenon time.
3.1.4. Band dimension
This dimension describes the band attribute of the raster products according to the
band name, polarization mode that is reserved for SAR images, and product-level
band. The product-level band is the information that is extracted from the original
bands. For example, the Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI) band is a product-
level band that is generated from original green and near-infrared bands.
The model allows one or multiple cubes to be created based on user specifications.
Each cube has a uniform spatial resolution and a CRS. Multiple cubes can be created
for multiple datasets, which aids in preserving the original information. It is possible
to perform queries across different cubes, and subsequently to re-sample and re-pro-
ject different cube data into a uniform spatial resolution and datum. Furthermore, a
cube in which multi-source datasets are spatially aligned can be created. This option
requires the re-sampling and re-projection of the dataset into a uniform spatial reso-
lution and datum. The cube management part in Figure 2 presents the cube meta-
data schema.
The dimension formalization part in Figure 2 follows a fact constellation schema.
The raster, vector, and tabular tile fact tables share product, spatial, and temporal
dimensions. The tabular data have the minimum requirement of the spatial dimension
being ingested in a spatially aligned cube. This can be achieved by a place name attri-
bute in the table data, which can subsequently be transformed into the spatial dimen-
sion using existing geocoding services. Two types of measures are used in the cube
data model: data and computational measures. The data measure is a reference to a
1862 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 12 =====

tile, which uses the tile ID for the physical raster tile, vector IDs for the features that
spatially intersect with a logical vector tile, or tabular IDs for the tabular records that
spatially intersect with a logical tabular tile. The computational measure consists of
values that are evaluated based on the computational intensity of the tiles. The follow-
ing sections describe how to take advantage of the cube data model.
The formalization of dimensions in the cube data model helps to support OLAP
operations on geospatial data, such as trim, slice, and roll up. Trim and slice are the
simplest operations that are used for geospatial data in a cube (Baumann 2017,
Voidrot and Percivall 2020). Trim selects multiple values along varying dimensions,
whereas slice can produce a sub-cube of reduced dimensions by selecting a single
value along a dimension. Figure 3(a) depicts a trim operation along the temporal and
spatial dimensions, which can return a stack of tiles within a given spatial extent and
time. A slice operation along the band and temporal dimensions is illustrated in
Figure 3(b) . Several interfaces for querying cube data have been presented, such as
getData($QueryParams), which is used to access raster/vector/tabular data. The
QueryParams class can be initiated using a cube identifier and a set of dimensional
information.
Roll up is a more complex OLAP operation, it is a data aggregation process along
different dimension levels, such as the grid/city/province in the spatial dimension,
day/month/year in the temporal dimension, original/product-level band in the band
dimension, and different-level products in the product dimension. The results of the
OLAP operation can be pre-computed and saved to create a new cube of different
dimension levels, leading to a faster response from the user. Considering a flood disas-
ter example, intersection analysis is performed between inundation images (a type of
raster data) and villages (a type of vector data) to identify flooded villages ( Figure
3(c)). Aggregation occurs along the product dimension, the flooded village is a higher-
level product, which can help to create a new cube with a higher-level product
dimension. The aggregation involves the Join and Intersection operations. The Join
operation is used to join the multi-source data based on the spatial and temporal
Figure 3. Cube OLAP operations.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1863

===== PAGE 13 =====

identifiers, thereafter, the Intersection operation can be performed between the raster
and vector data in the same spatial and temporal space. This example may involve
more roll up aggregations, such as the spatial merge function for tile mosaics along
the spatial dimension and the sum function for the total affected population calcula-
tion along the spatial dimension.
3.2. Cube tile processing using cloud computing
It is important to understand how data are organized in high-performance forms for
efficient cube processing. This section explains the leveraging of cloud computing to
design distributed cube objects for tiles, thereby facilitating high-performance distrib-
uted computing.
3.2.1. Distributed cube objects for tiles. Distributed cube objects for tiles are
designed by bridging tiles with distributed objects in cloud computing. The raster
data are segmented into tiles with a uniform projection and resolution in terms of the
spatial dimension in the cube. The vector data are segmented into logical tiles to
maintain their topology. A logical tile means that the vector data are not physically
segmented yet attached to a grid if the vector intersects with the grid. This can help
to preserve the geometric information of the vector data and facilitate their parallel
spatial analysis. The data tiles are organized at certain time intervals, such as a day,
week, month, and year in the temporal dimension, whereas the tiles are organized
according to the classification of the product/band types in the product/band dimen-
sion. Therefore, the raster tiles can be described by the product/band, spatial, and
temporal dimensions, whereas vector tiles can be described using the product, spatial,
and temporal dimensions.
Typical software, such as Apache Spark, includes distributed objects for HPC in
cloud computing. The core object model is the Spark RDD class. Thus, it is possible to
combine the distributed computing capability of the Spark RDD with the tiles in the
cube, which results in data parallelism in HPC. Subsequently, a set of distributed cube
objects is employed for the cube tiles. Figure 4 presents the hierarchy and transforma-
tions of the objects. CubeRDD[T] is the top class that contains a collection of key-value
pairs, which are inherited from the abstract RDD class. The key type of CubeRDD[T] is
fixed (i.e. the SpaceTimeProductKey class), and involves the product, spatial and tem-
poral dimensions, which are common dimensions for multi-source geospatial data,
including raster and vector data. The value type T is a geospatial data type (e.g. raster
and vector tile). It is designed to support multi-source data, thereby making the cube
objects extensible, which results in the accommodation of additional data types such
as trajectory data. CubeRDD[T] also provides grid layouts, spatial and temporal extents,
and CRS information.
The RasterRDD for raster data and FeatureRDD for vector data are designed based on
CubeRDD[T]. A RasterRDD can be transformed from a CubeRDD[RasterTile], where the
RasterTile class contains band information and an array of pixel data. Thus, RasterRDD
can contain the band dimension in addition to the product, spatial, and temporal
dimensions. A FeatureRDD can be transformed from a CubeRDD[FeatureCollection],
1864 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 14 =====

where the FeatureCollection class contains a set of geometries and their corresponding
attributes. A FeatureRDD can be converted into a SpatialRDD by retaining only the geo-
metric information. Subsequently, a PointRDD, PolylineRDD, and PolygonRDD can be
created from a SpatialRDD because the geometry may be a point, polyline, or polygon.
The CubeRDD design makes it easier to perform geoprocessing along different
dimensions. For example, a RasterRDD can be grouped along the temporal dimension
to enable distributed time-series analyses or along the band dimension to perform dis-
tributed band algebra operations, such as the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index.
A FeatureRDD can be grouped along the product dimension to support the distrib-
uted spatial intersection between two products. RasterRDDs and FeatureRDDs can be
joined together to locate raster and vector tiles that share common dimensions,
thereby enabling distributed joint analysis for multi-source geospatial data.
3.2.2. Cube querying and processing
The cube querying and processing operations are depicted in Figure 5 . First, the cube
receives and parses multi-dimensional query parameters, following which the tile IDs
are retrieved from the dimension and fact tables. These tile IDs are partitioned and
assigned to each computing unit to enable parallel data access. Cube processing
includes batch processing, cloud computing, and multi-thread computing. The use of
cloud computing and multi-thread computing forms hybrid parallelism, which refers
to a blend of distributed and shared memory parallelism (LLNL 2021).
Batch processing solves the issue whereby a large number of tiles cannot be loaded
into memory simultaneously, and it is used to divide the tiles into several batches.
Each batch can be loaded into memory as a whole. Thus, batch processing enables a
large number of tiles to be processed with limited memory. Each batch is accessed as
a distributed cube object (CubeRDD). Furthermore, a multi-thread pool is created to
process each single large tile. The size of a tile may be very large, for example, a high-
Figure 4. Distributed cube objects.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1865

===== PAGE 15 =====

resolution image or a grid containing a large number of polygons, which results in a
high time cost in data processing. Thus, hybrid parallel processing is required for the
cube processing. Each sub-thread processes only a portion of a tile in the multi-thread
pool and the processing results are gathered in the main thread. Thus, data processing
involves multiple processes among the computing nodes and multiple threads in one
node, thereby forming hybrid parallelism.
For example, the time period 2017.01.01 to 2020.12.31 can be divided into
2017.01.01 to 2018.12.31 and 2019.01.01 to 2020.12.31, whereas the spatial extent
(110
/C14 E, 25 /C14 N, 120 /C14 E, 35 /C14 N) can be divided into (110 /C14 E, 25 /C14 N, 115 /C14 E, 35 /C14 N) and (115 /C14 E,
25/C14 N, 120 /C14 E, 35 /C14 N). Subsequently, the batch tiles that are grouped according to the
aforementioned divisions are accessed and returned as distributed cube objects, which
are processed in the Spark cloud environment. A multi-thread pool containing eight
threads can be created in each process, and a tile is divided into eight sub-tiles for
each thread. The processing results of the threads are gathered, and finally, the results
of the batches are merged along the dimensions.
3.3. Cube computing optimization using AI
The data are organized as tiles that are loaded into distributed computing nodes in
the cube. Different tiles have different CIs in terms of the geoprocessing algorithms
and heterogeneous spatial feature distributions. Load balancing is a challenge in cube
computation, and two methods are commonly used to address this issue: static and
dynamic scheduling. Dynamic scheduling alleviates the load imbalance by monitoring
the status of the clusters and assigning tasks to idle computing units. However, the
advantages of this strategy are limited when the number of tasks is extremely low or
high. Too few tasks may make it difficult to achieve load balance, whereas too many
tasks often result in high communication cost. Static scheduling can divide and group
data into partitions with balanced computational intensity in advance. The accuracy of
the CI assessment is key to the success of this strategy.
GeoCube evaluates the CI of the tiles using AI machine learning approaches. This
work is a continuation of the previous research on the machine learning approach for
the prediction of the CI in parallel geoprocessing (Yue et al . 2020), which is extended
to the evaluation of the tile CI. Figure 6 shows how the approach is used in the cube
infrastructure to predict the CI of the cube tiles. A CI evaluation model for geospatial
Figure 5. Cube processing using batch computing, cloud computing, and multi-thread computing.
1866 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 16 =====

analysis is generated using AI machine learning feature selection and regression train-
ing. Feature selection is employed to evaluate the importance of a set of candidate
computational features that potentially affect the intensity. These features can be pre-
pared based on empirical knowledge and assessed during training stage. The machine
learning regression algorithms are evaluated using model training and validation to
determine the best model for the CI prediction. The CI of the tiles can be evaluated
using the model prior to the computation and saved in the cube infrastructure. When
specific cube analyses are performed, the computing cost can be directly derived from
the archived CI instead of evaluated on the fly, thereby enriching the ARD with more
content and saving time in the analysis stage.
The enrichment of the CI with the cube follows a n-ary model corresponding to n-
ary geoprocessing functions. In the 1-ary case, each tile has a single CI value corre-
sponding to a 1-ary geoprocessing function with one input, such as triangulation and
NDWI, which can be formalized as follows:
CI
k tfdimensionsgðÞ ¼ fk X t dimensionsfgðÞ
/C0/C1 , (1)
where tfdimensionsg is a cube tile that is identified by the specific dimensions, CIk /C3ðÞ is
the CI value of the tile in the geoprocessing k, X ð/C3Þ returns a list of computational
features of the tile, fk is a pretrained machine learning model for geoprocessing k,
and fk uses a set of computational features as inputs and returns a CI value.
In the 2-ary geoprocessing case, in which the function has two inputs such as a
two-layer intersection, each tile has a CI value that is associated with the tile of
another product in the cube. It can be formalized as follows:
Figure 6. Cube computation using AI-enabled CI prediction approach.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1867

===== PAGE 17 =====

CIk;i tfdimensionsgðÞ ¼ fk X t dimensionsfg , ti dimensionsfgðÞ
/C0/C1 , (2)
where CIk;i /C3ðÞ is the CI value of the tile that is associated with the tile of target prod-
uct i in geoprocessing k, ti dimensionsfg is the tile of target product i, and X ð/C3Þ returns a
list of computational features of the two tiles.
In the n-ary geoprocessing case, each tile has a CI value that is associated with the
tiles of the other n-1 products in the cube, which can be formalized as follows:
CIk;L tfdimensionsgðÞ ¼ fk X t dimensionsfg , tl1 dimensionsfg , tl2 dimensionsfg , ... , tln/C0 1 dimensionsfgðÞ
/C0/C1 ,
l1, l2, ... , ln/C0 1 2 L,
(3)
where CIk;L /C3ðÞ is the CI value of the tile that is associated with the tiles of the other n-
1 products L in geoprocessing k, tL dimensionsfg is the associated tile list, and X ð/C3Þ returns
a list of computational features of the n tiles.
The aforementioned model provides a theoretical basis for setting the CI values in
the cube. In practical applications, many geoprocessing functions are 1-ary or 2-ary
cases. The JSON data structure can be used to record the CI values. More specifically,
the CI values are saved in the fact table from Section 3.1 using JSON files, examples of
which are depicted in Figure 6 . One is for the geoprocessing on a single product, such
as spatial buffering, and the other is for geoprocessing between two products, such as
spatial intersection. In the former, each tile has a single CI value for a specific 1-ary
geoprocessing function. In the latter, each tile may have a CI value that is associated
with one of the target products in the cube for a specific 2-ary geoprocessing func-
tion, under the premise that the target products are semantically acceptable as the
second input for the 2-ary geoprocessing function. For example, a tile may have CI
values relating to the tiles of products (#1, #2, … ) in a 2-ary function.
The tiles can be assigned to computing units for balanced processing based on the
AI-predicted CI. The CI values are obtained when accessing the cube tiles, which can
be grouped and assigned to computing units based on the CI values. Subsequently,
an effective load balance can be achieved in the cube computation.
4. Implementation and evaluation
4.1. Implementation
The cube infrastructure was implemented as the GeoCube software. Figure 7 presents
the GeoCube implementation architecture. Three types of interfaces are offered to
users at the front end: Jupyter Notebook, the OGC geospatial Web service, and Web
UI. The back end includes four modules: the data source, data storage, data access,
and computing engine modules. The data source module manages multi-source geo-
spatial data, which can be either EO data, such as Landsat, Gaofen, and Sentinel, vec-
tor data, such as OSM, or high-level remote sensing products.
Data from external sources can be downloaded and preprocessed into an analysis-
ready level. A metadata database is available for managing and indexing the ARD.
Users can retrieve the ARD based on the metadata and subsequently ingest the data
into a cube. During the ingestion, the data are re-projected, re-sampled, and divided
into tiles according to the cube configuration. The cube data storage module manages
1868 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 18 =====

the tiles by leveraging both the relational and NoSQL databases: the dimension and
fact tables are managed using relational databases, whereas the raster and vector data
tables are managed using distributed NoSQL databases. The raster data table records
the tile ID and tile data bytes. The vector data table records the vector data IDs, geo-
metric information that is encoded using well-known text (WKT), and attributes that
are encoded using JSON. The data access module supports multi-dimensional queries
for geospatial data along the spatial, temporal, product, and band dimensions.
The computing engine module integrates cloud computing with the distributed
cube objects and AI-enabled CI prediction method to improve the computing per-
formance of the cube data processing, such as the map algebra, time-series analysis,
spatial analysis, and multi-source joint analysis.
In GeoCube, the fact constellation schema is implemented using PostgreSQL 9.3.24
(Momjian 2001), and the raster and vector tiles are saved in HBase 1.4.13 (George
2011), which is built on Hadoop 2.7.4 (White 2012). Spark 2.4.3 (Zaharia et al . 2010)
and Geotrellis 3.0.0 (Geotrellis 2021) are used to develop the distributed memory cube
objects, which are used for the parallel data ingestion, data access, and data process-
ing. The machine learning algorithms are implemented using Python 3.7 and Scikit-
learn 0.20.3 (Pedregosa et al . 2011). The OGC Web services are implemented using
Springboot 2.3.1 (Spring Boot 2021). The standard service interface allows users to
access the cube data and perform cube functions in an interoperable manner. For
Figure 7. Implementation architecture of GeoCube.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1869

===== PAGE 19 =====

example, users can access the standard coverage data instead of the cube tiles by
using the OGC Coverages API. The Web-based interactive development environment is
created using Jupyter Notebook (Jupyter 2021), and Cesium 1.71 is used for the data
visualization (Cesium 2021).
4.2. Proof of concept
4.2.1. Cube OLAP operations
GeoCube enables users to navigate among the levels of the cube data, ranging from
the most detailed to the most aggregated. For example, ‘year’ is a more aggregated
level than ‘month’ and ‘day’ in the temporal dimension. This section provides an
example of how to explore the cube data at two different levels. Figure 8(a) presents
the NDWI analysis using the most detailed levels of spatial, temporal, and band
dimensions. The level requests users to provide the spatial extent in the form of longi-
tude/latitude (WGS 84), the time range that is specific to the ‘day’, and the original
sensor bands. The spatial extent is transformed into a series of Z-order curve codes of
covered grids. As designed in the cube data model, the grid is the most detailed level
of the spatial dimension. Similarly, the day and original sensor band are the most
detailed levels of the temporal and band dimensions, respectively.
Figure 8(b) depicts the NDWI analysis at a more aggregated level. Users can provide
a city or province name in the spatial dimension. A city or province covers a number
of grids that are more aggregated than the grid. The data that are covered by the city
‘Wuhan’ are used to derive the NDWI product in Figure 8(b) . Query parameters that
are more aggregated than the day, such as the month and year, are supported in the
temporal dimension. The cube data with the same month or year can be aggregated.
Data from 2017 are used to derive the NDWI product in Figure 8(b) . The product-level
band is more aggregated than the original band in the band dimension. For example,
the NDWI band is more aggregated than the original bands, including green and
near-infrared bands. The two bands can be aggregated to perform the map algebra
operation to calculate the NDWI band.
The results that are derived from the aggregated-level analysis can be pre-com-
puted and saved to create a new cube, which is defined by more aggregated-level
dimensions. For example, the spatial dimension comprises cities such as Wuhan
instead of grids, the temporal dimension consists of years such as 2017 instead of
days, and the band dimension comprises product-level bands such as NDWI instead of
the original bands. The precomputing approach can lead to a faster response to users
by querying the new cube instead of performing computation on the fly.
4.2.2. Large-scale time-series geoprocessing
A significant benefit of the cube is that it supports large-scale time-series geoprocess-
ing. We use the computation of the water presence frequency analysis as an example.
It is a time-series analysis that detects the presence of water during a period and sum-
marizes the results as the number of times that water is detected at each pixel. The
analysis involves spatial merging (i.e. tile mosaics) and temporal aggregation (i.e. pixel
value averaging) (Mueller et al . 2016).
1870 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 20 =====

Figure 9 presents the results of the water presence frequency analysis, which are
derived from Landsat 8 images covering Hubei province from 2013 to 2018. High val-
ues in the results indicate that the region is detected as the water body most of the
time, and vice versa. The analysis considers the benefits of GeoCube for batch process-
ing, cloud computing, and multi-thread computing. The tiles are divided into batches
along the spatial dimension to ensure a full time-series stack of tiles. Approximately 1
TB of data are used in the analysis. Approximately 1.4 h are required to load the data
into memory and 1 h is required to complete the processing. A more comprehensive
performance analysis is provided in Section 4.3.2 .
4.2.3. Multi-source data cube analysis
GeoCube differs from existing cube approaches in that it can support multi-source
data analysis in cubes. This section presents a flood disaster case as an example to
demonstrate how multi-source data are used in GeoCube for a rapid response. It is
assumed that the disaster was caused by a tropical cyclone striking southern China
Figure 8. OLAP operations in GeoCube.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1871

===== PAGE 21 =====

and northern Vietnam. The hurricane was accompanied by heavy rain, resulting in
flood disasters in cities. Thousands of people were evacuated and many facilities were
impacted. This case involves raster data (e.g. remote sensing images), vector data (e.g.
facility features), and tabular data (e.g. populations). GeoCube can help to derive flood
inundation data products, impacted facilities, and affected populations using analytics
of these multi-source data.
In the case implementation, the water bodies before and after the disaster are
extracted from Gaofen-1 images, following which the flood inundation product can be
generated by subtracting the pre- and post-disaster data. Subsequently, impacted
facilities such as roads, bridges, villages, and schools, can be extracted using the flood
inundation product. Figure 10 depicts the flood inundation product (red region) and
impacted bridges (red icons). Furthermore, the population data can be used to derive
the affected populations by matching the village name with the vector data. Figure 11
presents the process of extracting the impacted villages and affected populations dur-
ing the flood disaster using Jupyter Notebook. The process includes importing the
GeoCube kernel, multi-dimensional querying, evaluating the impacted bridges and
affected populations, and displaying the results. The kernel contains the core APIs of
the GeoCube, such as getData(). All of these data products and statistical results can
quickly provide informational support for making disaster response decisions.
4.3. Performance evaluation
This section presents experiments to demonstrate the performance of GeoCube.
Figure 9. Product of water presence frequency analysis using Landsat-8 data covering Hubei prov-
ince from 2013 to 2018.
1872 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 22 =====

4.3.1. Data and environment
In the experiments, the raster data in GeoCube included data from the Landsat-8
Operational Land Imager sensor with a 30 m resolution, Gaofen 1 Panchromatic &
Multispectral Scanners with a resolution of 2/8 m, and Wide-Field-of-View sensor with
a resolution of 16 m. The vector data in the GeoCube were acquired from OSM.
GeoCube was deployed on three physical servers. Two were Inspure NF5280M4
servers, each with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2690 v4 @ 2.60 GHz, CentOS Linux
release 7.3.1611 OS, 28 CPU cores, and 128 GB of RAM. The other was an Inspure
Figure 10. Flood inundation product (red region) and impacted bridges (red icons) in
flood disaster.
Figure 11. Process of extracting impacted villages and affected populations in flood disaster using
Jupyter Notebook.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1873

===== PAGE 23 =====

NF5270M3 server with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2692 v2 @ 2.20 GHz, Ubuntu 14.04.1
OS, 24 CPU cores, and 94 GB of RAM. These servers were connected to a high-perform-
ance storage array with PB-level storage space. Specifically, 84 storage disks were
included, each of which had 16 TB of data storage.
4.3.2. Query and processing performance
In this experiment, the water presence frequency analysis was again used as an
example, and the performances of the ODC and GeoCube were compared to demon-
strate the query and processing capability of GeoCube. The ODC and GeoCube were
deployed in the same environment. ODC 1.8.3 was used, and the image data were
ingested as tiles and saved in the file system. The Xarray 0.18.0 and Dask 2021.3.0
libraries were used for the distributed computing.
Figure 12 presents the data query performances of the ODC and GeoCube, which
involved tile ID retrieval and tile data loading. It can be observed that the ODC exhib-
ited better performance than GeoCube when the data volume was small. However, as
the data volume increased, the time query efficiency of GeoCube was almost same as
that of ODC. The reason for this phenomenon is that the data are saved in a distrib-
uted environment in GeoCube. Compared to the ODC, in which the data are saved
centrally in a local file system, more network communications occur in the querying
process in GeoCube because the queried data must be obtained from other nodes if
they are not saved in the current node.
The distributed storage approach had a certain negative effect on the query effi-
ciency, however, it could improve the computing efficiency significantly because the
data already resided in the distributed nodes. Figure 13 presents the processing per-
formances of the ODC and GeoCube. It can be observed that GeoCube outperformed
the ODC, regardless of the data volume. GeoCube exhibited a greater time saving
than the ODC as the data volume increased. There are two reasons for this phenom-
enon: first, the data resided in the distributed nodes in advance, thereby reducing the
communication cost during processing, and second, the proposed hybrid parallel
Figure 12. Data query efficiency: GeoCube vs. Open Data Cube.
1874 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 24 =====

computing approach, including the multiple processes in cloud computing and mul-
tiple threads, significantly improved the processing efficiency.
4.3.3. Load balance performance
The spatial intersection of vector data is used as an example to demonstrate the load
balance performance of GeoCube. The original parallel spatial intersection method
without AI augmentation in GeoCube is a classical method, which is known as the par-
tition-based spatial-merge join (Patel and DeWitt 1996). The data were decomposed
based on a regular grid, which ignored the heterogeneity of the data, thereby leading
to a serious load imbalance.
This section presents a comparison of the load balance performance of the original
approach and the AI-enabled CI prediction approach in GeoCube. The vector data were
collected from OSM covering China and India. Three tests were implemented: the dataset
in the first test contained two layers with 1.69 and 0.49 million polygons, the dataset in the
second test contained two layers with 2.50 and 0.82 million polygons, and the dataset in
the third test contained two layers with 3.00 and 0.87 million polygons. The CI of each vec-
tor tile is pre-computed using a CI prediction model and saved in a JSON file in the AI
approach, whereas the CI is ignored in the original approach.
Figure 14 presents the accuracy of different CI prediction models based on the
combination of feature selection and machine learning algorithms. The training sample
contained approximately 1200 records, covering various areas of the datasets. Four
feature selection algorithms, namely Pearson, recursive feature elimination (RFE), mean
decrease in impurity (MDI) and mean decrease in accuracy (MDA) are tested together
with all features (AF), on four machine learning algorithms, namely classification and
regression tree (CART), random forest (RF), gradient boosting regression (GBR) and
support vector regression (SVR) (Yue et al . 2020). The two metrics R2 and mean abso-
lute error (MAE) were used to evaluate the model accuracy under 10-fold cross-valid-
ation. The results revealed that the model using a combination of MDI and RF
performed the best. The R2 and MAE of the model were 0.78 and 456 ms, respectively.
Figure 15 presents the time costs of different stages using the original approach
and AI-enabled CI prediction approach. With an increase in the number of polygons,
Figure 13. Data processing efficiency: GeoCube vs. Open Data Cube.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1875

===== PAGE 25 =====

the time cost of the data query stage was nearly equal when using the two
approaches. However, the AI approach exhibited a greater time saving compared to
the original approach in the processing stage. The load balance performance of the
two approaches on the three datasets is presented in Figure 16 , which indicates the
time cost for each executor. The results demonstrate that the AI approach could
achieve a better load balance performance than the original approach.
5. Discussions
Both EO and BI data cubes have been advocated in big data analytics, and it is
important for the two to be harmonized to support OLAP operations. The significant
Figure 14. Accuracy of different models from combinations of feature selection and machine learn-
ing algorithms: (a) R2 and (b) MAE.
Figure 15. Computing efficiency comparison between original and AI approaches.
Figure 16. Load balance performance comparison between original and AI approaches.
1876 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 26 =====

difference between EO and BI data cubes is that the pixels in EO data cubes are very
dense, whereas the elements in BI data cubes are always sparse, which may limit the
use of the BI OLAP approach for EO data cubes. Although both cubes can define the
dimensions and facts/cells, a key challenge is the management of densely populated
pixels in a high-performance form. The high-performance form should be capable of
dealing with EO images, as well as accommodating multi-source geospatial data by
considering their spatial heterogeneity and different data structures. To address these
issues, this study has presented an augmented cube with multi-source geospatial data
ingestion and management as well as the processing of multiple source data in a
cloud computing environment. Such a cube can inherit the large-scale processing
capabilities of EO data cubes and the data management capabilities of BI data cubes.
Several dimensions are customized for the raster and vector data in the cube mod-
eling. However, this model is not limited to raster and vector data, it can be extended
to accommodate more data sources, such as trajectory data, by incorporating fact and
dimension tables. This capability is borrowed from BI data cubes. Furthermore, this
approach enables OLAP/SOLAP operations on the cube data, which can be performed
on the fly or using the precomputing mode. The latter computes several commonly
used products in advance so that storage can be traded in for a rapid response to
users (Han et al . 1998, Koperski et al . 1998).
The integration of multi-source geospatial data is performed under the premise of
the cell granularity and shared formalization of the dimensions for the multi-source
data. As opposed to existing EO cubes, the proposed method introduces the idea of
SOLAP in traditional BI cubes by adding the spatial measure. Thus, the cell is not the
pixel of existing EO cubes, but may be a group of pixels and a set of spatial entities in
terms of the raster and vector, respectively. Furthermore, it is assumed that the raster/
vector/tabular data can have the same spatial dimension in a spatially aligned cube.
Although this requirement is sufficient for raster and vector data, it is not often the
case for tabular data. In the experiment that was conducted in this study, we assumed
that the population tabular data had place names, which could be geocoded and
transformed into the spatial dimension. If this is not the case, it is possible to create a
BI cube for the tabular data and to set up a common dimension based on the com-
mon attributes in the vector/tabular data. Thus, integration may still occur based on
the joint connection in a common dimension instead of the spatial dimension.
The data cube requires the re-organization of external data into a high-performance
form. This involves the duplication of data during the data ingestion, which will
increase the overhead. Typically, the overhead includes the storage overhead as well
as the potential re-sampling and re-projection overhead for spatial alignment. Thus, it
will be valuable to explore the optimization of the duplication, such as a zipped form,
distributed files, or NoSQL solutions. Parallel data ingestion is also possible, for
example, in a cloud environment, the rationale for which is the same as that of OLAP
in terms of trading in storage for rapid responses.
Cloud computing has been used extensively in geospatial infrastructure. It can sig-
nificantly improve the data storage and processing capabilities of cubes. Although the
cloud may lead to other issues such as privacy and accessibility, cube vendors can opt
to deploy the private cloud on their own hardware using open solutions, thereby
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1877

===== PAGE 27 =====

maintaining the cube data accessibility in a private environment. Moreover, the cou-
pling of the cubes and external data is flexible: external data vendors can deploy the
cube system to provide cube access or data can be downloaded from external data
vendors and ingested into local cubes. Although GeoCube is currently deployed in a
private cloud environment using local computing clusters, it may be used in public
cloud environments. The proposed distributed cube objects based on the Spark
middleware can be deployed on any virtual machine in a public infrastructure-as-a-ser-
vice (IaaS) environment. The use of AI methods to optimize the load balance in the
computation may be effective in capturing the heterogeneous computational features
of the geoprocessing. However, such method is more suitable for commonly used
products with fine-tuned prediction models. If the training cost for the AI evaluation
of the CI in specific analytical functions is excessive, straightforward tile dissemination
based on tile numbers may be preferable in simple computations, such as map alge-
bra operation, compared to complex ones, such as vector tile analysis.
GeoCube demonstrates the applicability of the proposed methods on Landsat,
Gaofen, Sentinel, and OSM. Other EO data sources are currently being tested and sup-
ported, and future work will extend the system to provincial EO data centers. A per-
formance comparison between GeoCube and the ODC has been presented, and
GeoCube outperformed the ODC in terms of data processing efficiency. In the experi-
ment, the ODC used the NetCDF format for data storage, which is known for its lim-
ited capabilities in the cloud environment. Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF (COG) is an
alternative imagery data format for the cloud environment (COG 2021), and ODC users
are attempting to use this format to improve the performance. A comparison of the
ODC based on COG with GeoCube could form an aspect of our future work.
The alignment of multi-source data with different spatial and temporal resolutions
is a challenge, which often requires re-sampling, re-projection, and various preprocess-
ing steps such as radiometric and geometric correction. Therefore, ARD is suggested
as the input for the EO data cube. ARD is currently a popular term in the EO domain
for satellite imagery data products. It is commonly defined as a type of products fol-
lowing a series of preprocessing operations (Killough et al . 2020). As a multi-source
geospatial cube infrastructure, GeoCube contains satellite imagery data, as well as vec-
tor and tabular data. At present, no definition for vector and tabular ARD is available.
Based on the experience in this work, it is possible to suggest a definition of ARD
from the data production and computational perspectives. Regarding data production,
vector and tabular ARD mean that the data are quality assured at different levels in
terms of completeness, consistency, and accuracy. From a computational perspective,
vector and tabular ARD need to be organized in a high-performance ready and spa-
tially aligned form, for example, tiling and using formats such as COG.
The GeoCube kernel API remains an ad-hoc interface (e.g. QueryParams), and inter-
operability is an issue in data cube communities. The OGC Testbed-17 is currently
exploring the identification of a neutral definition of Geo Data Cubes (GDCs) and the
development of a Web API for convenient, interoperable GDC access and exploitation
(OGC 2021). Moreover, CEOS has suggested the use of the ODC in various countries,
such as Colombia and Switzerland, with the aim of alleviating the interoperability issue
(CEOS 2021). Finally, the OGC coverage model can be used to represent a multi-
1878 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 28 =====

dimensional data cube, and the WCS can support cube operations such as slicing and
trimming (Baumann 2018). The data cube is still under development and we are
exploring new ideas to improve its interoperability.
6. Conclusions and future work
This study has presented a cube infrastructure for big geospatial data analysis. The
infrastructure accommodates multi-source geospatial data, including raster and vector
data. A cube data model was designed and four dimensions, namely product, space,
time, and band dimensions, were formalized. Several examples of cube exploration
have been presented. The infrastructure enables large-scale analysis using a hybrid
parallel method. A set of distributed cube objects extending the Spark RDD for cube
tiles was designed. The distributed cube objects are compatible with multiple data
sources, including raster and vector data. To improve the data processing efficiency
further, a multi-thread computing method was employed together with cloud comput-
ing to form hybrid parallelism. Batch computation was also used to address the issue
whereby a massive number of tiles cannot be loaded into memory simultaneously.
Moreover, a machine learning-based approach was integrated into the cube to
enhance the parallel geoprocessing. The CI of the tiles can be predicted and saved in
databases in advance, thereby eliminating the additional time cost of on-the-fly CI pre-
diction for commonly used products.
The design and implementation of the cube infrastructure, which is known as
GeoCube, have been outlined. It covers the ingestion and management of multi-
source geospatial data in the cube, geospatial data querying and access along differ-
ent cube dimensions, and high-performance cube computing of large-scale geospatial
datasets. The development of such a geospatial data cube aids in advancing the EO
data cube approach as well as keeps connections with the BI cube. The performance
of the data querying and access, data processing, and load balancing were presented.
The results demonstrate the advantages of the GeoCube infrastructure. Several appli-
cations have been presented, including cube OLAP operations, large-scale time-series
analysis, and multi-source data cube analysis. The results on Landsat, Gaofen, and
OSM demonstrate the applicability of GeoCube.
The data cube infrastructure is still under development and receiving increasing
attention owing to its potential for EO data management and processing. In addition
to interoperability, the following issues should be investigated in the future: (1)
Discrete global grid systems (DGGS) exhibit promise as processing-efficient tiling grids
for both raster and vector data (Purss et al . 2019). It would be worthwhile to investi-
gate this tiling mechanism for more efficient cube processing. (2) In this study, the AI
was limited to improving the cube processing performance. Work has been carried
out on the use of AI to optimize data index, such as learned index (Kraska et al . 2018).
This can be explored in the future to optimize the data index of the cube. (3) The cur-
rent cube analysis remains limited to traditional analytical functions. Deep learning
analytics has been investigated extensively in the geospatial domain. It is necessary to
explore the manner in which deep learning frameworks can be incorporated into the
cube infrastructure to enable faster model training and data inference based on the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1879

===== PAGE 29 =====

cube capabilities. Thus, intelligent interpretation models for object detection, scene
classification, and change detection can be provided in a well-organized cube infra-
structure. (4) ARD is the primary data form for traditional analysis in the current cube,
and AI training data are another type of data form for deep learning. Thus, it is valu-
able to explore a new AI-ready data form to promote the cube infrastructure. In add-
ition to the two types of ready data, decision-ready data that are used by decision
makers are also important, which are often derived by a workflow involving ARD, AI-
ready data, and analysis models. For example, decision makers may require supporting
information regarding a flooded road that is only passable by special vehicles. Such
information can be derived as decision-ready data using ARD such as terrain topog-
raphy and flood gauges. Decision-ready data can also be integrated into the current
cube to form a three-ready-data (i.e. ARD, AI-ready data, and decision-ready data) geo-
spatial infrastructure. Such a cube infrastructure will promote the development of the
current paradigm (i.e. ARD processing) in the EO domain.
Acknowledgements
We appreciate Professor Jennifer Miller and three reviewers for their constructive comments
that helped improve the quality of the paper. The work was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 42090011 and No. 42071354), and Major Science and
Technology Projects of Hubei Province (No. 2020AAA004).
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China [No. 42090011 and
No. 42071354], and Key Research and Development Program of Hubei, China [No. 2020AAA004].
Notes on contributors
Fan Gao is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering at
Wuhan University. His research interest is in high-performance geoprocessing and GIS. He con-
tributed to the idea, study design, methodology, implementation, and manuscript writing of
this paper.
Peng Yue is a professor at Wuhan University. He serves as the director at Hubei Province
Engineering Center for Intelligent Geoprocessing and the director at the Institute of Geospatial
Information and Location Based Services. He supervised the research, and contributed to the
idea, study design, methodology, and manuscript writing of this paper.
Zhipeng Cao is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering at
Wuhan University. His research interest is in big spatio-temporal data stores. He contributed to
the idea, methodology, and implementation.
Shuaifeng Zhao is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information
Engineering at Wuhan University. His research interest is in big spatio-temporal data stores and
processing. He contributed to the idea, methodology, and implementation.
1880 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 30 =====

Boyi Shangguan is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information
Engineering at Wuhan University. His research interest is in high-performance geoprocessing
and GIService. He contributed to the idea, methodology, and implementation.
Liangcun Jiang is an associate research fellow in the School of Remote Sensing and Information
Engineering at Wuhan University. His research interests include Earth observation data infra-
structure, data provenance, and geospatial semantic web. He contributed to the idea, study
design, and methodology.
Lei Hu is a postdoctoral researcher in the School of Remote Sensing and Information
Engineering at Wuhan University. His research interests include Earth observation science and
systems, geospatial interoperability and standards, and environmental modelling in agriculture
and disaster management. He contributed to the idea, study design, and methodology.
Zhe Fang is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering at
Wuhan University. His research interest is in disaster emergency response. He contributed to the
idea, methodology, and implementation.
Zheheng Liang is the chief engineer of South Digital Technology Co., Ltd. He currently is the
special reviewer of the journal ‘Geographic Information World ’, and an expert in the comprehen-
sive evaluation expert database of Guangdong Province. He contributed to the idea, study
design, and methodology.
ORCID
Peng Yue http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3006-4542
Data and codes availability statement
The data and codes that support the findings of this study are available in https://doi.org/
10.6084/m9.figshare.15032847.
References
Baumann, P., 2017. The datacube manifesto [online]. EU EarthServer. Available from: https://earth-
server.eu/tech/datacube-manifesto/The-Datacube-Manifesto.pdf [Accessed 22 July 2021].
Baumann, P., 2018. Datacube standards and their contribution to analysis-ready data. In : 2018
IEEE international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (IGARSS), 22 –27 July 2018 Valencia.
New York: IEEE, 2051 –2053.
Baumann, P., et al. , 1999. Spatio-temporal retrieval with RasDaMan. In : Proceedings of 25th inter-
national conference on very large data bases, 7 –10 September 1999 Edinburgh. Burlington:
Morgan Kaufmann, 746 –749.
Baumann, P., et al. , 2016. Big data analytics for earth sciences: the EarthServer approach.
International Journal of Digital Earth , 9 (1), 3 –29.
Baumann, P., et al. , 2018., Fostering Cross-Disciplinary Earth Science Through Datacube
Analytics. In : P.P. Mathieu and C. Aubrecht, eds. Earth observation open science and innovation .
Switzerland: Springer Cham, 91 –199.
Berrick, S., et al. , 2009. Giovanni: a web service workflow-based data visualization and analysis
system. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 47 (1), 106 –113.
Bimonte, S., et al. , 2010. When spatial analysis meets OLAP: multidimensional model and opera-
tors. International Journal of Data Warehousing and Mining , 6 (4), 33 –60.
CEOS, 2021. Open Data Cube [online]. CEOS. Available from: https://www.opendatacube.org/ceos
[Accessed 22 July 2021].
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1881

===== PAGE 31 =====

Cesium, 2021. The Platform for 3D Geospatial [online]. Cesium GS, Inc. Available from: https://ces-
ium.com [Accessed 22 July 2021].
Chaudhuri, S., and Dayal, U., 1997. An overview of data warehousing and OLAP technology.
ACM SIGMOD Record , 26 (1), 65 –74.
COG, 2021. Cloud Optimized Geotiff [online]. Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF community. Available
from: https://www.cogeo.org [Accessed 26 October 2021].
Damiani, M.L., and Spaccapietra, S., 2008. Spatial data warehouse modelling. In: J. Wang, ed.
Data warehousing and mining: concepts, methodologies, tools, and applications. Hershey: IGI
Global, 659 –678.
Dask, 2021. Scalable analytics in Python [online]. NumFOCUS community. Available from: https://
dask.org [Accessed 22 July 2021].
ESA, 2012. Grid processing on demand (G-POD) for earth observation applications [online].
European Space Agency (ESA). Available from: https://gpod.eo.esa.int [Accessed 26 October
2021].
ESDC, 2021. Earth system data cube [online]. The Earth System Data Cube (ESDC) Team.
Available from: https://cablab.readthedocs.io/en/latest [Accessed 22 July 2021].
George, L., 2011. HBase: the definitive guide: random access to your planet-size data . California:
O’Reilly Media Inc.
Geotrellis, . 2021. A geographic data processing engine for high performance applications
[online]. Azavea Inc. Available from: https://geotrellis.readthedocs.io/en/latest [Accessed 22
July 2021].
Giuliani, G., et al. , 2017. Building an earth observations data cube: lessons learned from the
Swiss Data Cube (SDC) on generating analysis ready data (ARD). Big Earth Data. ,1( 1 –2),
100–117.
Gomes, V.C.F., et al. , 2021. Accessing and processing Brazilian earth observation data cubes with
the open data cube platform. ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences , V-4-2021, 153 –159.
Gorelick, N., et al. , 2017. Google earth engine: planetary-scale geospatial analysis for everyone.
Remote Sensing of Environment , 202, 18 –27.
Gray, J., et al. , 1997. Data cube: a relational aggregation operator generalizing group-by, cross-
tab, and sub-totals. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , 1 (1), 29 –53.
Han, J., et al. , 1998. Selective materialization: An efficient method for spatial data cube construc-
tion. In : Pacific-Asia conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 15 –17 April 1998.
Australia. Berlin: Springer, 144 –158.
Jupyter, 2021. Project Jupyter [online]. Jupyter community. Available from: https://jupyter.org
[Accessed 22 July 2021].
Kasprzyk, J.P., and Devillet, G., 2021. A data cube metamodel for geographic analysis involving
heterogeneous dimensions. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information , 10 (2), 87.
Killough, B., et al. , 2020. Advancements in the open data cube and analysis ready data —past,
present and future. In : 2020 IEEE international geoscience and remote sensing symposium
(IGARSS),1 6 –26 July 2018. Waikoloa Village, New York: IEEE, 3373 –3375.
Kimball, R., and Ross, M., 2011. The data warehouse toolkit: the complete guide to dimensional
modeling. New York: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Koperski, K., et al. , 1998. Mining knowledge in geographical data. Communications of the ACM ,
26 (1), 65 –74.
Kopp, S., et al. , 2019. Achieving the full vision of earth observation data cubes. Data, 4 (3), 94.
Kraska, T., et al. , 2018. The case for learned index structures. In: Proceedings of the 2018 inter-
national conference on management of data, 10 –15 June 2018. Houston, New York: ACM
Digital Library, 489 –504.
Lewis, A., et al. , 2016. Rapid, high-resolution detection of environmental change over continental
scales from satellite data –the earth observation data cube. International Journal of Digital
Earth, 9 (1), 106 –111.
Lewis, A., et al. , 2017. The Australian geoscience data cube —foundations and lessons learned.
Remote Sensing of Environment , 202 (1), 276 –292.
1882 F. GAO ET AL.

===== PAGE 32 =====

Lewis, A., et al. , 2018. CEOS analysis ready data for land (CARD4L) Overview. In: IEEE international
geoscience and remote sensing symposium (IGARSS), 22 –27 July 2018. Valencia, New York: IEEE,
7407–7410.
LLNL, 2021. Introduction to Parallel Computing Tutorial [online]. Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory (LLNL). Available from: https://hpc.llnl.gov/training/tutorials/introduction-parallel-
computing-tutorial [Accessed 22 July 2021]
Mahecha, M.D., et al. , 2020. Earth system data cubes unravel global multivariate dynamics. Earth
System Dynamics , 11 (1), 201 –234.
Momjian, B., 2001. PostgreSQL: introduction and concepts . New York: Addison-Wesley.
Mueller, N., et al. , 2016. Water observations from space: mapping surface water from 25 years of
Landsat imagery across Australia. Remote Sensing of Environment , 174 (1), 341 –352.
Nativi, S., et al. , 2017. A view-based model of data-cube to support big earth data systems inter-
operability. Big Earth Data. ,1( 1 –2), 75 –99.
OGC, 2021. Testbed-17. OGC testbed initiative [online]. OGC. Available from: https://portal.ogc.
org/files/?artifact_id=95726 [Accessed 22 July 2021].
Patel, J.M., and DeWitt, D.J., 1996. Partition based spatial-merge join. ACM SIGMOD Record ,2 5
(2), 259 –270.
Pedregosa, F., et al. , 2011. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 12 (10), 2825 –2830.
Purss, M.B.J., et al. , 2019. Datacubes: a discrete global grid systems perspective. Cartographica,
54 (1), 63 –71.
Rasdaman, 2021. Raster data manager [online]. Rasdaman GmbH. Available from: http://rasda-
man.com [Accessed 22 July 2021].
Rivest, S., et al. , 2001. Toward better support for spatial decision making: defining the character-
istics of spatial on-line analytical processing (SOLAP). Geomatica, 55 (4), 539 –555.
Schramm, M., et al. , 2021. The openeo api –harmonising the use of earth observation cloud serv-
ices using virtual data cube functionalities. Remote Sensing , 13 (6), 1125.
Silva, J.D., et al. , 2008. A set of aggregation functions for spatial measures. In : Proceedings of the
ACM 11th international workshop on Data warehousing and OLAP, 30 October. Napa Valley,
New York: ACM Digital Library, 25 –32.
Spring Boot, 2021. Spring [online]. VMware, Inc. Available from: https://spring.io/projects/spring-
boot [Accessed 22 July 2021].
Strobl, P., et al. , 2017. The six faces of the data cube. In : Proceedings of big data from space con-
ference, 28 –30 November 2017 . Toulouse. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European
Union, 28 –30.
Sudmanns, M., et al. , 2019. Big Earth data: disruptive changes in earth observation data manage-
ment and analysis? International Journal of Digital Earth , 13 (7), 832 –850.
Voidrot, M.F., and Percivall, G., 2020. OGC geospatial coverages data cube community practice.
Vol. 509. In: 11th International symposium on digital earth, 24 –27 September 2019. Florence.
Bristol: IOP Publishing, 012058.
Wagemann, J., et al. , 2018. Geospatial web services pave new ways for server-based on-demand
access and processing of big earth data. International Journal of Digital Earth , 11 (1), 7 –25.
White, T., 2012. Hadoop: The definitive guide . California: O ’Reilly Media Inc.
Wulder, M.A., and Coops, N.C., 2014. Satellites: make earth observations open access. Nature,
513 (7516), 30 –31.
Xarray, 2021. N-D labeled arrays and datasets in Python [online]. NumFOCUS. Available from:
http://xarray.pydata.org/en/stable [Accessed 22 July 2021].
Yue, P., et al. , 2010. GeoPW: laying blocks for the geospatial processing web. Transactions in GIS ,
14 (6), 755 –772.
Yue, P., et al. , 2016. Recent activities in earth data science. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Magazine, 4 (4), 84 –89.
Yue, P., et al. , 2020. A machine learning approach for predicting computational intensity and
domain decomposition in parallel geoprocessing. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science , 34 (11), 2243 –2274.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1883

===== PAGE 33 =====

Zaharia, M., et al. , 2010. Spark: Cluster computing with working sets . In: Proceedings of the 2nd
USENIX conference on Hot topics in cloud computing ,2 2 –25 June 2010, Boston. California:
USENIX Association, 10.
Zarr. 2021. Zarr format [online]. MRC Centre for Genomics and Global Health. Available from:
https://zarr.readthedocs.io [Accessed 22 July 2021].
Zhao, P., et al. , 2012. The geoprocessing web. Computers & Geosciences , 47 (10), 3 –12.
1884 F. GAO ET AL.