the completeness of the vector features. The resolution of the spatial grid is customiz-
able, e.g. a 1 /C2 1 grid tile (grid size) that consists of 4000 /C2 4000 pixels (pixel size). The
grid type table is used for recoding the layout of a grid, including the grid and pixel
sizes, as well as the coordinate reference system (CRS). The CRS may be the World
Geodetic System 1984 (WGS 84) or a projected coordinate reference system such as
the Universal Transverse Mercator, depending on user specification. A grid code is
assigned to each tile to enable the indexing of the grid tiles. The code follows Z-order
curve-based encoding so that contiguous tiles are assigned to the same node, and
thus, the query and computing performance can be improved owing to the reduced
communication cost. When a bounding box query is considered, the grids with which
the bounding box intersects will be determined first, following which the grids that
are encoded using the Z-order curve can be found in the database. The tile data that
are identified by the grid codes are often located in the same node. The city and prov-
ince names can be used to support certain OLAP aggregation operations.
3.1.3. Temporal dimension
This dimension specifies the temporal axis for the geospatial data using the phenom-
enon time and result time. The phenomenon time is the time when the observation is
captured such as the acquisition time for satellite imagery and the update time for
vector and tabular data, whereas the result time is the time when the result becomes
available once all processing steps have been completed. Data querying or subsetting
along the temporal dimension can be performed using the phenomenon time.
3.1.4. Band dimension
This dimension describes the band attribute of the raster products according to the
band name, polarization mode that is reserved for SAR images, and product-level
band. The product-level band is the information that is extracted from the original
bands. For example, the Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI) band is a product-
level band that is generated from original green and near-infrared bands.
The model allows one or multiple cubes to be created based on user specifications.
Each cube has a uniform spatial resolution and a CRS. Multiple cubes can be created
for multiple datasets, which aids in preserving the original information. It is possible
to perform queries across different cubes, and subsequently to re-sample and re-pro-
ject different cube data into a uniform spatial resolution and datum. Furthermore, a
cube in which multi-source datasets are spatially aligned can be created. This option
requires the re-sampling and re-projection of the dataset into a uniform spatial reso-
lution and datum. The cube management part in Figure 2 presents the cube meta-
data schema.
The dimension formalization part in Figure 2 follows a fact constellation schema.
The raster, vector, and tabular tile fact tables share product, spatial, and temporal
dimensions. The tabular data have the minimum requirement of the spatial dimension
being ingested in a spatially aligned cube. This can be achieved by a place name attri-
bute in the table data, which can subsequently be transformed into the spatial dimen-
sion using existing geocoding services. Two types of measures are used in the cube
data model: data and computational measures. The data measure is a reference to a
1862 F. GAO ET AL.