difference between EO and BI data cubes is that the pixels in EO data cubes are very
dense, whereas the elements in BI data cubes are always sparse, which may limit the
use of the BI OLAP approach for EO data cubes. Although both cubes can define the
dimensions and facts/cells, a key challenge is the management of densely populated
pixels in a high-performance form. The high-performance form should be capable of
dealing with EO images, as well as accommodating multi-source geospatial data by
considering their spatial heterogeneity and different data structures. To address these
issues, this study has presented an augmented cube with multi-source geospatial data
ingestion and management as well as the processing of multiple source data in a
cloud computing environment. Such a cube can inherit the large-scale processing
capabilities of EO data cubes and the data management capabilities of BI data cubes.
Several dimensions are customized for the raster and vector data in the cube mod-
eling. However, this model is not limited to raster and vector data, it can be extended
to accommodate more data sources, such as trajectory data, by incorporating fact and
dimension tables. This capability is borrowed from BI data cubes. Furthermore, this
approach enables OLAP/SOLAP operations on the cube data, which can be performed
on the fly or using the precomputing mode. The latter computes several commonly
used products in advance so that storage can be traded in for a rapid response to
users (Han et al . 1998, Koperski et al . 1998).
The integration of multi-source geospatial data is performed under the premise of
the cell granularity and shared formalization of the dimensions for the multi-source
data. As opposed to existing EO cubes, the proposed method introduces the idea of
SOLAP in traditional BI cubes by adding the spatial measure. Thus, the cell is not the
pixel of existing EO cubes, but may be a group of pixels and a set of spatial entities in
terms of the raster and vector, respectively. Furthermore, it is assumed that the raster/
vector/tabular data can have the same spatial dimension in a spatially aligned cube.
Although this requirement is sufficient for raster and vector data, it is not often the
case for tabular data. In the experiment that was conducted in this study, we assumed
that the population tabular data had place names, which could be geocoded and
transformed into the spatial dimension. If this is not the case, it is possible to create a
BI cube for the tabular data and to set up a common dimension based on the com-
mon attributes in the vector/tabular data. Thus, integration may still occur based on
the joint connection in a common dimension instead of the spatial dimension.
The data cube requires the re-organization of external data into a high-performance
form. This involves the duplication of data during the data ingestion, which will
increase the overhead. Typically, the overhead includes the storage overhead as well
as the potential re-sampling and re-projection overhead for spatial alignment. Thus, it
will be valuable to explore the optimization of the duplication, such as a zipped form,
distributed files, or NoSQL solutions. Parallel data ingestion is also possible, for
example, in a cloud environment, the rationale for which is the same as that of OLAP
in terms of trading in storage for rapid responses.
Cloud computing has been used extensively in geospatial infrastructure. It can sig-
nificantly improve the data storage and processing capabilities of cubes. Although the
cloud may lead to other issues such as privacy and accessibility, cube vendors can opt
to deploy the private cloud on their own hardware using open solutions, thereby
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1877