RESEARCH ARTICLE
A multi-source spatio-temporal data cube for large-scale
geospatial analysis
Fan Gao a, Peng Yue a,b,c , Zhipeng Cao a, Shuaifeng Zhao a,
Boyi Shangguan a, Liangcun Jiang a, Lei Hu a, Zhe Fang a and Zheheng Liang d
aSchool of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China;
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Geospatial Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China; cHubei Province
Engineering Center for Intelligent Geoprocessing (HPECIG), Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China;
dSouth Digital Technology Co, Ltd., Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
ABSTRACT
Data management and analysis are challenging with big Earth
observation (EO) data. Expanding upon the rising promises of
data cubes for analysis-ready big EO data, we propose a new geo-
spatial infrastructure layered over a data cube to facilitate big EO
data management and analysis. Compared to previous work on
data cubes, the proposed infrastructure, GeoCube, extends the
capacity of data cubes to multi-source big vector and raster data.
GeoCube is developed in terms of three major efforts: formalize
cube dimensions for multi-source geospatial data, process geo-
spatial data query along these dimensions, and organize cube
data for high-performance geoprocessing. This strategy improves
EO data cube management and keeps connections with the busi-
ness intelligence cube, which provides supplementary information
for EO data cube processing. The paper highlights the major
efforts and key research contributions to online analytical process-
ing for dimension formalization, distributed cube objects for tiles,
and artificial intelligence enabled prediction of computational
intensity for data cube processing. Case studies with data from
Landsat, Gaofen, and OpenStreetMap demonstrate the capabilities
and applicability of the proposed infrastructure.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 23 July 2021
Accepted 5 June 2022
KEYWORDS
Data cube; high-
performance computing;
earth observation; cloud
computing; artificial
intelligence
1. Introduction
Earth observation (EO) data, a prime source of big data, comprise large-scale and
multi-source geospatial data that are acquired from orbital sensors, in-situ measure-
ments, and simulation models (Baumann et al . 2018, Wagemann et al . 2018). The man-
agement of EO data is challenging owing to the demand for the integration of
multiple data sources, high-performance processing, and diverse applications of EO
data. These multi-source EO data are characterized by the difference in spatial, tem-
poral, and spectral resolutions, varying conditions in observations (e.g. different atmos-
pheric conditions and viewing geometries), and diverse spatial data structures (e.g.
CONTACT Peng Yue pyue@whu.edu.cn
/C2232022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE
2022, VOL. 36, NO. 9, 1853 –1884
https://doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2022.2087222