identifiers, thereafter, the Intersection operation can be performed between the raster
and vector data in the same spatial and temporal space. This example may involve
more roll up aggregations, such as the spatial merge function for tile mosaics along
the spatial dimension and the sum function for the total affected population calcula-
tion along the spatial dimension.
3.2. Cube tile processing using cloud computing
It is important to understand how data are organized in high-performance forms for
efficient cube processing. This section explains the leveraging of cloud computing to
design distributed cube objects for tiles, thereby facilitating high-performance distrib-
uted computing.
3.2.1. Distributed cube objects for tiles. Distributed cube objects for tiles are
designed by bridging tiles with distributed objects in cloud computing. The raster
data are segmented into tiles with a uniform projection and resolution in terms of the
spatial dimension in the cube. The vector data are segmented into logical tiles to
maintain their topology. A logical tile means that the vector data are not physically
segmented yet attached to a grid if the vector intersects with the grid. This can help
to preserve the geometric information of the vector data and facilitate their parallel
spatial analysis. The data tiles are organized at certain time intervals, such as a day,
week, month, and year in the temporal dimension, whereas the tiles are organized
according to the classification of the product/band types in the product/band dimen-
sion. Therefore, the raster tiles can be described by the product/band, spatial, and
temporal dimensions, whereas vector tiles can be described using the product, spatial,
and temporal dimensions.
Typical software, such as Apache Spark, includes distributed objects for HPC in
cloud computing. The core object model is the Spark RDD class. Thus, it is possible to
combine the distributed computing capability of the Spark RDD with the tiles in the
cube, which results in data parallelism in HPC. Subsequently, a set of distributed cube
objects is employed for the cube tiles. Figure 4 presents the hierarchy and transforma-
tions of the objects. CubeRDD[T] is the top class that contains a collection of key-value
pairs, which are inherited from the abstract RDD class. The key type of CubeRDD[T] is
fixed (i.e. the SpaceTimeProductKey class), and involves the product, spatial and tem-
poral dimensions, which are common dimensions for multi-source geospatial data,
including raster and vector data. The value type T is a geospatial data type (e.g. raster
and vector tile). It is designed to support multi-source data, thereby making the cube
objects extensible, which results in the accommodation of additional data types such
as trajectory data. CubeRDD[T] also provides grid layouts, spatial and temporal extents,
and CRS information.
The RasterRDD for raster data and FeatureRDD for vector data are designed based on
CubeRDD[T]. A RasterRDD can be transformed from a CubeRDD[RasterTile], where the
RasterTile class contains band information and an array of pixel data. Thus, RasterRDD
can contain the band dimension in addition to the product, spatial, and temporal
dimensions. A FeatureRDD can be transformed from a CubeRDD[FeatureCollection],
1864 F. GAO ET AL.