maintaining the cube data accessibility in a private environment. Moreover, the cou-
pling of the cubes and external data is flexible: external data vendors can deploy the
cube system to provide cube access or data can be downloaded from external data
vendors and ingested into local cubes. Although GeoCube is currently deployed in a
private cloud environment using local computing clusters, it may be used in public
cloud environments. The proposed distributed cube objects based on the Spark
middleware can be deployed on any virtual machine in a public infrastructure-as-a-ser-
vice (IaaS) environment. The use of AI methods to optimize the load balance in the
computation may be effective in capturing the heterogeneous computational features
of the geoprocessing. However, such method is more suitable for commonly used
products with fine-tuned prediction models. If the training cost for the AI evaluation
of the CI in specific analytical functions is excessive, straightforward tile dissemination
based on tile numbers may be preferable in simple computations, such as map alge-
bra operation, compared to complex ones, such as vector tile analysis.
GeoCube demonstrates the applicability of the proposed methods on Landsat,
Gaofen, Sentinel, and OSM. Other EO data sources are currently being tested and sup-
ported, and future work will extend the system to provincial EO data centers. A per-
formance comparison between GeoCube and the ODC has been presented, and
GeoCube outperformed the ODC in terms of data processing efficiency. In the experi-
ment, the ODC used the NetCDF format for data storage, which is known for its lim-
ited capabilities in the cloud environment. Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF (COG) is an
alternative imagery data format for the cloud environment (COG 2021), and ODC users
are attempting to use this format to improve the performance. A comparison of the
ODC based on COG with GeoCube could form an aspect of our future work.
The alignment of multi-source data with different spatial and temporal resolutions
is a challenge, which often requires re-sampling, re-projection, and various preprocess-
ing steps such as radiometric and geometric correction. Therefore, ARD is suggested
as the input for the EO data cube. ARD is currently a popular term in the EO domain
for satellite imagery data products. It is commonly defined as a type of products fol-
lowing a series of preprocessing operations (Killough et al . 2020). As a multi-source
geospatial cube infrastructure, GeoCube contains satellite imagery data, as well as vec-
tor and tabular data. At present, no definition for vector and tabular ARD is available.
Based on the experience in this work, it is possible to suggest a definition of ARD
from the data production and computational perspectives. Regarding data production,
vector and tabular ARD mean that the data are quality assured at different levels in
terms of completeness, consistency, and accuracy. From a computational perspective,
vector and tabular ARD need to be organized in a high-performance ready and spa-
tially aligned form, for example, tiling and using formats such as COG.
The GeoCube kernel API remains an ad-hoc interface (e.g. QueryParams), and inter-
operability is an issue in data cube communities. The OGC Testbed-17 is currently
exploring the identification of a neutral definition of Geo Data Cubes (GDCs) and the
development of a Web API for convenient, interoperable GDC access and exploitation
(OGC 2021). Moreover, CEOS has suggested the use of the ODC in various countries,
such as Colombia and Switzerland, with the aim of alleviating the interoperability issue
(CEOS 2021). Finally, the OGC coverage model can be used to represent a multi-
1878 F. GAO ET AL.