possibility of implementing a data cube consisting of multi-source and heterogeneous
geospatial data that share several common dimensions.
2.3. EO data cube
Data cubes have gained increasing attentions in recent years and have exhibited great
promise in the EO domain for extracting useful information from big EO data
(Baumann et al . 2016, Giuliani et al . 2017, Sudmanns et al . 2019, Schramm et al . 2021).
An EO data cube can be defined as a time-series multi-dimensional (space, time, and
data type) stack of spatially aligned pixels that are ready for analysis (Nativi et al .
2017). Although existing EO data cubes focus on images, in this study, the cube con-
cept is extended to cover other geospatial data sources, such as vector data, thereby
providing a multi-source geospatial data cube.
Table 2 presents a comparison of three typical EO data cubes and the proposed
GeoCube. The EarthServer data cube was created using the Rasdaman Array Database
system (Baumann et al . 1999). It supports intercontinental-scale data management, ad-
hoc extraction, and processing (Baumann et al . 2016, 2018). The cube can use either
the PostgreSQL database or file systems to store data, although the PostgreSQL option
has recently been deprecated. The metadata are represented using the OGC
Geography Markup Language Coverages (GMLCOV) specification, which is stored in
PostgreSQL or SQLite. Multiple data indexing methods are supported, such as the
R þ tree and regular computed index. The EarthServer data cube supports the Web
service interface that is provided by the Petascope on top of Rasdaman, including the
OGC Web Coverage Service (WCS) and Web Coverage Processing Service (WCPS).
Table 2. Comparison of different data cubes.
EarthServer
data cube Open data cube Earth system data cube GeoCube
Data source Raster data Raster data Raster data Raster data/
vector data
Spatial OLAP No No No Yes
Computing pattern HPC HPC HPC HPC/AI-enabled
computational
intensity
prediction
Data organization Raster tile Raster tile Raster tile Raster tile/vector tile
Metadata PostgreSQL/SQLite
(GMLCOV model)
PostgreSQL (JSONB) File system (config file) PostgreSQL (fact
constellation
schema)
Array-based
interface provided
Yes Yes Yes Yes
Data indexing Tile indexing Scene and tile indexing Tile indexing Tile indexing
Data ingestion Mandatory Optional Mandatory Mandatory
User interaction WCS/WCPS,
rasql,
Cþþ/Java/R/
JavaScript API
WCS/WMS/WPS,
Jupyter Notebook,
Python API
FTP/WCS,
Jupyter Notebook,
Python/Julia/R API
OGC API –
Coverages/
Processes,
OGC Data Access
and Processing
API, Jupyter
Notebook,
Scala/Python API
1858 F. GAO ET AL.