computing approach, including the multiple processes in cloud computing and mul-
tiple threads, significantly improved the processing efficiency.
4.3.3. Load balance performance
The spatial intersection of vector data is used as an example to demonstrate the load
balance performance of GeoCube. The original parallel spatial intersection method
without AI augmentation in GeoCube is a classical method, which is known as the par-
tition-based spatial-merge join (Patel and DeWitt 1996). The data were decomposed
based on a regular grid, which ignored the heterogeneity of the data, thereby leading
to a serious load imbalance.
This section presents a comparison of the load balance performance of the original
approach and the AI-enabled CI prediction approach in GeoCube. The vector data were
collected from OSM covering China and India. Three tests were implemented: the dataset
in the first test contained two layers with 1.69 and 0.49 million polygons, the dataset in the
second test contained two layers with 2.50 and 0.82 million polygons, and the dataset in
the third test contained two layers with 3.00 and 0.87 million polygons. The CI of each vec-
tor tile is pre-computed using a CI prediction model and saved in a JSON file in the AI
approach, whereas the CI is ignored in the original approach.
Figure 14 presents the accuracy of different CI prediction models based on the
combination of feature selection and machine learning algorithms. The training sample
contained approximately 1200 records, covering various areas of the datasets. Four
feature selection algorithms, namely Pearson, recursive feature elimination (RFE), mean
decrease in impurity (MDI) and mean decrease in accuracy (MDA) are tested together
with all features (AF), on four machine learning algorithms, namely classification and
regression tree (CART), random forest (RF), gradient boosting regression (GBR) and
support vector regression (SVR) (Yue et al . 2020). The two metrics R2 and mean abso-
lute error (MAE) were used to evaluate the model accuracy under 10-fold cross-valid-
ation. The results revealed that the model using a combination of MDI and RF
performed the best. The R2 and MAE of the model were 0.78 and 456 ms, respectively.
Figure 15 presents the time costs of different stages using the original approach
and AI-enabled CI prediction approach. With an increase in the number of polygons,
Figure 13. Data processing efficiency: GeoCube vs. Open Data Cube.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1875