CIk;i tfdimensionsgðÞ ¼ fk X t dimensionsfg , ti dimensionsfgðÞ
/C0/C1 , (2)
where CIk;i /C3ðÞ is the CI value of the tile that is associated with the tile of target prod-
uct i in geoprocessing k, ti dimensionsfg is the tile of target product i, and X ð/C3Þ returns a
list of computational features of the two tiles.
In the n-ary geoprocessing case, each tile has a CI value that is associated with the
tiles of the other n-1 products in the cube, which can be formalized as follows:
CIk;L tfdimensionsgðÞ ¼ fk X t dimensionsfg , tl1 dimensionsfg , tl2 dimensionsfg , ... , tln/C0 1 dimensionsfgðÞ
/C0/C1 ,
l1, l2, ... , ln/C0 1 2 L,
(3)
where CIk;L /C3ðÞ is the CI value of the tile that is associated with the tiles of the other n-
1 products L in geoprocessing k, tL dimensionsfg is the associated tile list, and X ð/C3Þ returns
a list of computational features of the n tiles.
The aforementioned model provides a theoretical basis for setting the CI values in
the cube. In practical applications, many geoprocessing functions are 1-ary or 2-ary
cases. The JSON data structure can be used to record the CI values. More specifically,
the CI values are saved in the fact table from Section 3.1 using JSON files, examples of
which are depicted in Figure 6 . One is for the geoprocessing on a single product, such
as spatial buffering, and the other is for geoprocessing between two products, such as
spatial intersection. In the former, each tile has a single CI value for a specific 1-ary
geoprocessing function. In the latter, each tile may have a CI value that is associated
with one of the target products in the cube for a specific 2-ary geoprocessing func-
tion, under the premise that the target products are semantically acceptable as the
second input for the 2-ary geoprocessing function. For example, a tile may have CI
values relating to the tiles of products (#1, #2, … ) in a 2-ary function.
The tiles can be assigned to computing units for balanced processing based on the
AI-predicted CI. The CI values are obtained when accessing the cube tiles, which can
be grouped and assigned to computing units based on the CI values. Subsequently,
an effective load balance can be achieved in the cube computation.
4. Implementation and evaluation
4.1. Implementation
The cube infrastructure was implemented as the GeoCube software. Figure 7 presents
the GeoCube implementation architecture. Three types of interfaces are offered to
users at the front end: Jupyter Notebook, the OGC geospatial Web service, and Web
UI. The back end includes four modules: the data source, data storage, data access,
and computing engine modules. The data source module manages multi-source geo-
spatial data, which can be either EO data, such as Landsat, Gaofen, and Sentinel, vec-
tor data, such as OSM, or high-level remote sensing products.
Data from external sources can be downloaded and preprocessed into an analysis-
ready level. A metadata database is available for managing and indexing the ARD.
Users can retrieve the ARD based on the metadata and subsequently ingest the data
into a cube. During the ingestion, the data are re-projected, re-sampled, and divided
into tiles according to the cube configuration. The cube data storage module manages
1868 F. GAO ET AL.