cube capabilities. Thus, intelligent interpretation models for object detection, scene
classification, and change detection can be provided in a well-organized cube infra-
structure. (4) ARD is the primary data form for traditional analysis in the current cube,
and AI training data are another type of data form for deep learning. Thus, it is valu-
able to explore a new AI-ready data form to promote the cube infrastructure. In add-
ition to the two types of ready data, decision-ready data that are used by decision
makers are also important, which are often derived by a workflow involving ARD, AI-
ready data, and analysis models. For example, decision makers may require supporting
information regarding a flooded road that is only passable by special vehicles. Such
information can be derived as decision-ready data using ARD such as terrain topog-
raphy and flood gauges. Decision-ready data can also be integrated into the current
cube to form a three-ready-data (i.e. ARD, AI-ready data, and decision-ready data) geo-
spatial infrastructure. Such a cube infrastructure will promote the development of the
current paradigm (i.e. ARD processing) in the EO domain.
Acknowledgements
We appreciate Professor Jennifer Miller and three reviewers for their constructive comments
that helped improve the quality of the paper. The work was supported by National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No. 42090011 and No. 42071354), and Major Science and
Technology Projects of Hubei Province (No. 2020AAA004).
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China [No. 42090011 and
No. 42071354], and Key Research and Development Program of Hubei, China [No. 2020AAA004].
Notes on contributors
Fan Gao is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering at
Wuhan University. His research interest is in high-performance geoprocessing and GIS. He con-
tributed to the idea, study design, methodology, implementation, and manuscript writing of
this paper.
Peng Yue is a professor at Wuhan University. He serves as the director at Hubei Province
Engineering Center for Intelligent Geoprocessing and the director at the Institute of Geospatial
Information and Location Based Services. He supervised the research, and contributed to the
idea, study design, methodology, and manuscript writing of this paper.
Zhipeng Cao is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information Engineering at
Wuhan University. His research interest is in big spatio-temporal data stores. He contributed to
the idea, methodology, and implementation.
Shuaifeng Zhao is a Ph.D. student in the School of Remote Sensing and Information
Engineering at Wuhan University. His research interest is in big spatio-temporal data stores and
processing. He contributed to the idea, methodology, and implementation.
1880 F. GAO ET AL.