data cubes often require higher-performance solutions. Moreover, traditional SOLAP
can accommodate vector data, whereas EO data cubes focus on raster data. It is pos-
sible to extend the spatial dimension and spatial measure into EO data cubes to
enable cube analysis on multi-source datasets. Thus, it is necessary to investigate
approaches for bridging EO and BI data cubes by augmenting cubes with multi-source
geospatial data ingestion and management, and performing cube processing of joint
data analysis between dense data (EO data) and sparse data (vector or tabular data).
Therefore, in this study, the geospatial data cube is understood as a time-series multi-
dimensional data model, in which multi-source geospatial data can be organized as
spatially aligned ARD in a high-performance form. Multi-source geospatial data are not
limited to EO data, such as remote sensing images, but also can be vector, trajectory,
point cloud, or tabular data. The geospatial data cube makes big EO data more access-
ible and enables large-scale analysis using HPC technologies.
2.2. BI data cube
The BI data cube was first introduced by Gray et al .( 1997) for business data manage-
ment, and it represents business data in the form of a multi-dimensional array using
concepts such as the dimension, measure, cell, and level. A data cube is composed of
cells, which can be defined based on their dimensions and measures. The dimensions
Table 1. Several definitions of data cube.
Reference Definition
Data Cube: A Relational Aggregation Operator
Generalizing Group-By, Cross-Tab, and Sub-Totals
(Gray et al . 1997)
An OLAP cube is a multi-dimensional array of data. The
0 D data cube is a point. The 1 D data cube is a line
with a point. The 2 D data cube is a cross tab, a plane,
two lines, and a point. The 3 D data cube is a cube
with three intersecting 2 D cross tabs.
Selective materialization: An efficient method
for spatial data cube construction
(Han et al . 1998)
A spatial data cube is a subject-oriented, integrated, time-
variant, and non-volatile collection of both spatial and
nonspatial data, which consists of both spatial and
nonspatial dimensions and measures.
The Datacube Manifesto (Baumann 2017) A datacube is a massive multi-dimensional array, also
called ‘raster data ’ or ‘gridded data ’; ‘massive’ entails
that we talk about sizes significantly beyond the main
memory resources of the server hardware. Data values,
all of the same data type, sit at grid points as defined
by the d axes of the d-dimensional datacube.
Coordinates along these axes allow addressing data
values unambiguously. A d-dimensional grid is
characterized by the fact that each inner grid point has
exactly two neighbors along each direction; border grid
points have just one.
A view-based model of data-cube to support big earth
data systems interoperability (Nativi et al . 2017)
A time series multidimensional (space, time, data type)
stack of spatially aligned pixel ready for analysis.
OGC Geospatial Coverages Data Cube Community
Practice (Voidrot and Percivall 2020)
A multi-dimensional ( ‘n-D’) array of values. Even though it
is called a ’cube’, it can be 1-dimensional, 2-
dimensional, 3-dimensional, or higher-dimensional. The
dimensions may be coordinates or enumerations, e.g.
categories. A geospatial data cube is a data cube
established on basis of a coverage with a specific grid
system for geospatial data with at least one dimension
of spatial or temporal definition.
1856 F. GAO ET AL.