example, users can access the standard coverage data instead of the cube tiles by
using the OGC Coverages API. The Web-based interactive development environment is
created using Jupyter Notebook (Jupyter 2021), and Cesium 1.71 is used for the data
visualization (Cesium 2021).
4.2. Proof of concept
4.2.1. Cube OLAP operations
GeoCube enables users to navigate among the levels of the cube data, ranging from
the most detailed to the most aggregated. For example, ‘year’ is a more aggregated
level than ‘month’ and ‘day’ in the temporal dimension. This section provides an
example of how to explore the cube data at two different levels. Figure 8(a) presents
the NDWI analysis using the most detailed levels of spatial, temporal, and band
dimensions. The level requests users to provide the spatial extent in the form of longi-
tude/latitude (WGS 84), the time range that is specific to the ‘day’, and the original
sensor bands. The spatial extent is transformed into a series of Z-order curve codes of
covered grids. As designed in the cube data model, the grid is the most detailed level
of the spatial dimension. Similarly, the day and original sensor band are the most
detailed levels of the temporal and band dimensions, respectively.
Figure 8(b) depicts the NDWI analysis at a more aggregated level. Users can provide
a city or province name in the spatial dimension. A city or province covers a number
of grids that are more aggregated than the grid. The data that are covered by the city
‘Wuhan’ are used to derive the NDWI product in Figure 8(b) . Query parameters that
are more aggregated than the day, such as the month and year, are supported in the
temporal dimension. The cube data with the same month or year can be aggregated.
Data from 2017 are used to derive the NDWI product in Figure 8(b) . The product-level
band is more aggregated than the original band in the band dimension. For example,
the NDWI band is more aggregated than the original bands, including green and
near-infrared bands. The two bands can be aggregated to perform the map algebra
operation to calculate the NDWI band.
The results that are derived from the aggregated-level analysis can be pre-com-
puted and saved to create a new cube, which is defined by more aggregated-level
dimensions. For example, the spatial dimension comprises cities such as Wuhan
instead of grids, the temporal dimension consists of years such as 2017 instead of
days, and the band dimension comprises product-level bands such as NDWI instead of
the original bands. The precomputing approach can lead to a faster response to users
by querying the new cube instead of performing computation on the fly.
4.2.2. Large-scale time-series geoprocessing
A significant benefit of the cube is that it supports large-scale time-series geoprocess-
ing. We use the computation of the water presence frequency analysis as an example.
It is a time-series analysis that detects the presence of water during a period and sum-
marizes the results as the number of times that water is detected at each pixel. The
analysis involves spatial merging (i.e. tile mosaics) and temporal aggregation (i.e. pixel
value averaging) (Mueller et al . 2016).
1870 F. GAO ET AL.