joint analysis of multi-source and heterogeneous geospatial data. SOLAP and EO data
cubes work together in a cloud computing environment. Cloud computing refers to
the on-demand use of storage and computing resources that are located on net-
worked computers. Existing cloud computing technologies such as Apache Spark have
been used extensively for big data processing. Apache Spark is a high-performance
cloud computing engine that was developed for data-intensive applications. It incor-
porates a data model known as the Resilient Distributed Dataset (RDD), which is a
data collection that is partitioned across a set of machines for distributed computing
(Zaharia et al . 2010). The leveraging of cloud computing and this data model can sig-
nificantly improve the processing capabilities of the cube infrastructure. (3) The infra-
structure improves the load balance of parallel geoprocessing using AI. Although
cloud computing empowers the infrastructure with parallel geoprocessing capabilities,
geospatial data are heterogeneous and spatially distributed in an irregular manner,
which often leads to a load imbalance owing to the various computational intensities
of the different tiles. AI machine learning technology, which has shown potential for
the evaluation of CI (Yue et al . 2020), can be incorporated into the distributed tile
processing to improve the load balance.
3. Materials and methods
This section describes the approach for constructing the multi-source spatio-temporal
data cube for large-scale geospatial analysis. The approach includes the formalization
of cube dimensions to accommodate multi-source data ( Section 3.1 ), cube tile process-
ing using cloud computing ( Section 3.2 ), and enhanced cube computation using AI
(Section 3.3 ).
A new geospatial data cube with the following characteristics is proposed. First,
multi-source geospatial data, including raster and vector data, can be accommodated
in the cube. Four dimensions, namely time, space, product, and band, are formalized.
The multi-source data are spatially aligned and stacked in a time-series form. Thus, it
is named as a multi-source spatio-temporal data cube. The cube is developed using
the OLAP fact constellation schema, so that OLAP operations such as spatial merge,
map algebra and time-series analysis can be performed on the cube ( Section 3.1 ).
Second, cloud computing is used for processing the cube tiles. Distributed cube
objects for cube tiles are proposed to facilitate the distributed computing ( Section
3.2). Third, AI technologies are applied to enhance the load balance in the cube com-
putation. The heterogeneity of the geospatial data can be captured from a data sci-
ence perspective using AI machine learning, thereby optimizing the parallel
computing performance ( Section 3.3 ).
3.1. Cube dimension formalization
The cube dimensions are important for the development of a cube data model.
Geospatial data can be represented in multiple dimensions, such as the space, time,
and thematic properties. The model specifies several basic dimensions to accommo-
date the raster, vector, and tabular data, as illustrated in Figure 2 .
1860 F. GAO ET AL.