These service requests can be translated into the Rasdaman Query Language (RaSQL)
and executed in the Rasdaman database (Rasdaman 2021).
The Open Data Cube (ODC) initiative is an open-source project that was launched
by the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) (CEOS 2021, Gomes et al .
2021). The objective of the ODC is to lower technical barriers and to provide a solution
for national or local agencies to create data cubes that are similar to the Australian
geoscience data cube, Colombia data cube, and Swiss data cube (Lewis et al . 2017,
CEOS 2021). The ODC can manage large amounts of satellite data and process
national-scale or even continent-scale satellite data using HPC technologies. It allows
to store data in the original format or ingest data in a high-performance tile format.
The former adopts the traditional scene-based index, whereas the latter uses tile-based
index. The same API can be enforced on top of the two organizing forms, although
the former option was recently recommended for the ODC. The Dask parallel comput-
ing engine can be used in the ODC for parallel Earth science, satellite imagery, and
time-series analyses (Dask 2021). Unlike the Dask in the ODC, Apache Spark (Zaharia
et al . 2010) is selected for GeoCube, because it has a wider user base in open-source
cloud computing communities, with more programming languages and a comprehen-
sive software ecosystem covering Hadoop, HBase, and Geotrellis. In the ODC, the EO
data in the tile format are stored using the Network Common Data Form (NetCDF).
The metadata are encoded using the JSONB format and managed in the PostgreSQL
database (Lewis et al . 2017). Five relational tables are leveraged to manage the cube
data. Furthermore, the ODC provides the Web service interface, including the OGC
WCS, Web Map Service (WMS), and Web Processing Service (WPS) (Voidrot and
Percivall 2020).
The objective of the Earth System Data Cube (ESDC) is to explore various EO raster
data streams simultaneously to enable joint analysis. Multiple data streams are inte-
grated into a single high-dimensional data cube. The infrastructure provides the same
data cube at different spatial resolutions and chunkings to accelerate data access for
different applications (Mahecha et al . 2020). The cube data are encoded using the Zarr
format (Zarr 2021), which is a format that is optimized for cloud storage. The ESDC
uses a file system directory to organize the data, and each cube instance has a config-
uration file for describing the spatial and temporal resolution. The ESDC enables data
retrieval and downloading via file transfer protocol (FTP). Moreover, the OGC WCS and
Jupyter Notebook are supported for data access and analytics (ESDC 2021).
2.4. Contributions of the work
This study presents a new cube infrastructure for big geospatial data analysis. The
method differs from existing cube approaches in the following aspects: (1) The infra-
structure supports the accommodation of multi-source geospatial data, including ras-
ter and vector data in the cube. The multi-source data are segmented into a tile form
in a NoSQL database, ready for HPC, thereby enabling the user to perform efficient
multi-source data analysis using the high-performance tile form. (2) The infrastructure
supports large-scale and joint analysis for cube tiles using a cloud-based cube object.
It is compatible with multiple data sources, which can help solving the problem of the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1859