raster and vector data) (Lewis et al . 2016). These characteristics make EO data integra-
tion, storage, and processing a challenging topic.
Recent advances in information infrastructures have shown significant promises for
EO data processing (Yue et al . 2016, Sudmanns et al . 2019)( Figure 1 ). Several para-
digm shifts occurred in the EO domain between the 1990s and 2000s. In the local
processing paradigm, EO data are often downloaded from data portals and processed
in local machines. This may result in high network bandwidth resources and time
costs. The capabilities of users are limited in solving large-scale geospatial problems
owing to insufficient local storage space and computing power (Wulder and Coops
2014, Kopp et al . 2019). The development of Web technologies and geospatial Web
services has made it possible for users to discover, access, and process geospatial data
on spatial data infrastructure with ease (Zhao et al . 2012). Examples include the
Geospatial Interactive Online Visualization and Analysis Infrastructure that was devel-
oped by the Goddard Earth Sciences Data and Information Services Center (Berrick
et al . 2009), and Grid Processing on Demand System that was developed by European
Space Agency (ESA 2012). Users can customize data products using scientific work-
flows that are composed of geospatial Web services such as data services, sensor Web
services, and processing services. Geospatial data can be accessed via the Internet in
an interoperable manner, and the processing can be migrated to remote servers
instead of being performed on local machines (Yue et al . 2010). This is known as the
service-oriented processing paradigm. In recent years, the analysis-ready pattern has
emerged as a revolutionary paradigm for big geospatial data processing (Gorelick
et al . 2017, CEOS 2021). It requires EO data to be preprocessed into an analysis-ready
form, following which the Cyberinfrastructure is harnessed to make the data available
to users. Analysis-ready data (ARD) means that the EO data are processed following a
minimum set of requirements, thereby enabling immediate analysis with a minimal
additional user effort and interoperability (Lewis et al . 2018). ARD can be incorporated
into a geospatial data cube, which makes big EO data more accessible and enables
Figure 1. Paradigm shift in EO processing.
1854 F. GAO ET AL.