where the FeatureCollection class contains a set of geometries and their corresponding
attributes. A FeatureRDD can be converted into a SpatialRDD by retaining only the geo-
metric information. Subsequently, a PointRDD, PolylineRDD, and PolygonRDD can be
created from a SpatialRDD because the geometry may be a point, polyline, or polygon.
The CubeRDD design makes it easier to perform geoprocessing along different
dimensions. For example, a RasterRDD can be grouped along the temporal dimension
to enable distributed time-series analyses or along the band dimension to perform dis-
tributed band algebra operations, such as the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index.
A FeatureRDD can be grouped along the product dimension to support the distrib-
uted spatial intersection between two products. RasterRDDs and FeatureRDDs can be
joined together to locate raster and vector tiles that share common dimensions,
thereby enabling distributed joint analysis for multi-source geospatial data.
3.2.2. Cube querying and processing
The cube querying and processing operations are depicted in Figure 5 . First, the cube
receives and parses multi-dimensional query parameters, following which the tile IDs
are retrieved from the dimension and fact tables. These tile IDs are partitioned and
assigned to each computing unit to enable parallel data access. Cube processing
includes batch processing, cloud computing, and multi-thread computing. The use of
cloud computing and multi-thread computing forms hybrid parallelism, which refers
to a blend of distributed and shared memory parallelism (LLNL 2021).
Batch processing solves the issue whereby a large number of tiles cannot be loaded
into memory simultaneously, and it is used to divide the tiles into several batches.
Each batch can be loaded into memory as a whole. Thus, batch processing enables a
large number of tiles to be processed with limited memory. Each batch is accessed as
a distributed cube object (CubeRDD). Furthermore, a multi-thread pool is created to
process each single large tile. The size of a tile may be very large, for example, a high-
Figure 4. Distributed cube objects.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1865