dimensional data cube, and the WCS can support cube operations such as slicing and
trimming (Baumann 2018). The data cube is still under development and we are
exploring new ideas to improve its interoperability.
6. Conclusions and future work
This study has presented a cube infrastructure for big geospatial data analysis. The
infrastructure accommodates multi-source geospatial data, including raster and vector
data. A cube data model was designed and four dimensions, namely product, space,
time, and band dimensions, were formalized. Several examples of cube exploration
have been presented. The infrastructure enables large-scale analysis using a hybrid
parallel method. A set of distributed cube objects extending the Spark RDD for cube
tiles was designed. The distributed cube objects are compatible with multiple data
sources, including raster and vector data. To improve the data processing efficiency
further, a multi-thread computing method was employed together with cloud comput-
ing to form hybrid parallelism. Batch computation was also used to address the issue
whereby a massive number of tiles cannot be loaded into memory simultaneously.
Moreover, a machine learning-based approach was integrated into the cube to
enhance the parallel geoprocessing. The CI of the tiles can be predicted and saved in
databases in advance, thereby eliminating the additional time cost of on-the-fly CI pre-
diction for commonly used products.
The design and implementation of the cube infrastructure, which is known as
GeoCube, have been outlined. It covers the ingestion and management of multi-
source geospatial data in the cube, geospatial data querying and access along differ-
ent cube dimensions, and high-performance cube computing of large-scale geospatial
datasets. The development of such a geospatial data cube aids in advancing the EO
data cube approach as well as keeps connections with the BI cube. The performance
of the data querying and access, data processing, and load balancing were presented.
The results demonstrate the advantages of the GeoCube infrastructure. Several appli-
cations have been presented, including cube OLAP operations, large-scale time-series
analysis, and multi-source data cube analysis. The results on Landsat, Gaofen, and
OSM demonstrate the applicability of GeoCube.
The data cube infrastructure is still under development and receiving increasing
attention owing to its potential for EO data management and processing. In addition
to interoperability, the following issues should be investigated in the future: (1)
Discrete global grid systems (DGGS) exhibit promise as processing-efficient tiling grids
for both raster and vector data (Purss et al . 2019). It would be worthwhile to investi-
gate this tiling mechanism for more efficient cube processing. (2) In this study, the AI
was limited to improving the cube processing performance. Work has been carried
out on the use of AI to optimize data index, such as learned index (Kraska et al . 2018).
This can be explored in the future to optimize the data index of the cube. (3) The cur-
rent cube analysis remains limited to traditional analytical functions. Deep learning
analytics has been investigated extensively in the geospatial domain. It is necessary to
explore the manner in which deep learning frameworks can be incorporated into the
cube infrastructure to enable faster model training and data inference based on the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1879