large-scale analysis with high-performance computing (HPC) technologies (e.g. parallel
computing or cloud computing).
This study presents a cube infrastructure for big geospatial data analysis. In
comparison with existing cube approaches, the infrastructure emphasizes the
accommodation of multi-source geospatial data, including raster and vector data in
the cube, cube tile processing with cloud computing, and artificial intelligence (AI)
machine learning-enabled cube computation. AI-enabled cube computation refers
to the use of AI for predicting the computational intensity (CI) of parallel cube
processing tasks, which aids in improving the load balance performance. The
design and implementation of the cube infrastructure, which is known as GeoCube,
are detailed in this paper. It covers the ingestion and management of multi-source
geospatial data in the cube, geospatial data querying and access along different
cube dimensions, and high-performance cube computing of large-scale geospatial
datasets. The development of such a geospatial data cube can contribute to
advancing the EO data cube approach, as well as keep connections with the busi-
ness intelligence (BI) cube.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the back-
ground and related work. The proposed method is described in Section 3 . The imple-
mentation and evaluation of GeoCube are detailed in Section 4 . Section 5 presents a
discussion and Section 6 concludes the study.
2. Background and related work
2.1. Data cube concept
The term ‘data cube ’ originates from the BI domain. As a data cube generally refers to
an array of multiple dimensions that facilitates online analytics, it is also known as an
online analytical processing (OLAP) cube (Gray et al . 1997). The OLAP cube was intro-
duced into the geospatial domain to accommodate spatial entities in vector data by
adding the spatial dimension and spatial measure, thereby promoting OLAP to spatial
OLAP (SOLAP) (Han et al . 1998). In recent years, this term has been used in the EO
domain to refer to a time-series multi-dimensional array ( Table 1 ). It has been incorpo-
rated into Cyberinfrastructure to create EO data cube infrastructure, which facilitates
EO data management, access, analysis, visualization, and interoperability. Table 1 lists
several typical definitions of data cube, covering definitions from the OLAP, SOLAP,
array database (Baumann 2017), Earth Science Informatics (Nativi et al . 2017), and
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) (Voidrot and Percivall 2020) communities. In the
remainder of this paper, the former two are referred to as BI data cubes, whereas the
latter three are categorized as EO data cubes.
It is often recognized that EO data cubes are not similar to BI data cubes, despite
the cube concepts being similar. EO data cubes are always densely populated,
whereas BI data cubes are typically sparse, which limits the use of the OLAP approach
in EO data cubes (Strobl et al . 2017). A major challenge in bridging the two cubes is
the manner in which the data are organized in high-performance forms for efficient
cube processing. In a traditional BI data cube, a relational database is often selected
for cube management, which is possible owing to the sparse datasets. However, EO
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1855