tile, which uses the tile ID for the physical raster tile, vector IDs for the features that
spatially intersect with a logical vector tile, or tabular IDs for the tabular records that
spatially intersect with a logical tabular tile. The computational measure consists of
values that are evaluated based on the computational intensity of the tiles. The follow-
ing sections describe how to take advantage of the cube data model.
The formalization of dimensions in the cube data model helps to support OLAP
operations on geospatial data, such as trim, slice, and roll up. Trim and slice are the
simplest operations that are used for geospatial data in a cube (Baumann 2017,
Voidrot and Percivall 2020). Trim selects multiple values along varying dimensions,
whereas slice can produce a sub-cube of reduced dimensions by selecting a single
value along a dimension. Figure 3(a) depicts a trim operation along the temporal and
spatial dimensions, which can return a stack of tiles within a given spatial extent and
time. A slice operation along the band and temporal dimensions is illustrated in
Figure 3(b) . Several interfaces for querying cube data have been presented, such as
getData($QueryParams), which is used to access raster/vector/tabular data. The
QueryParams class can be initiated using a cube identifier and a set of dimensional
information.
Roll up is a more complex OLAP operation, it is a data aggregation process along
different dimension levels, such as the grid/city/province in the spatial dimension,
day/month/year in the temporal dimension, original/product-level band in the band
dimension, and different-level products in the product dimension. The results of the
OLAP operation can be pre-computed and saved to create a new cube of different
dimension levels, leading to a faster response from the user. Considering a flood disas-
ter example, intersection analysis is performed between inundation images (a type of
raster data) and villages (a type of vector data) to identify flooded villages ( Figure
3(c)). Aggregation occurs along the product dimension, the flooded village is a higher-
level product, which can help to create a new cube with a higher-level product
dimension. The aggregation involves the Join and Intersection operations. The Join
operation is used to join the multi-source data based on the spatial and temporal
Figure 3. Cube OLAP operations.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1863