represent the analysis axes and a measure is a numerical variable that is identified by
a combination of dimensions. A dimension can be organized into levels hierarchically,
with each level corresponding to a different granularity for that dimension (Damiani
and Spaccapietra 2008). Considering a marketing sales example, a set of dimensions
can be defined, such as the location, time, and product type. The measure can be
defined by the values of the sales. Thus, it can be identified using the location, time,
and product type dimensions. Among these dimensions, the time dimension can be
represented by different levels, such as day, month, and year, so that the values of the
sales can be aggregated along the dimension (Rivest et al . 2001).
A BI data cube is always used with the OLAP approach. OLAP can store different
cube versions of a dataset at different aggregation levels, thereby providing complex
and fast aggregation processes to summarize the data (Kasprzyk and Devillet 2021).
OLAP defines several operations for users to explore a data cube (Chaudhuri and
Dayal 1997):
/C15 trim and slice, which performs data selection along dimensions;
/C15 roll up, which moves up along one or more dimensions towards more aggre-
gated data;
/C15 drill down, which moves down along one or more dimensions towards more
detailed data; and
/C15 pivot, which reorients the data cube for a different view.
Spatial attribute is an important dimension of geospatial data. The straightforward
use of an OLAP dimension as a spatial dimension cannot support the aggregation
processes of spatial entities. Therefore, SOLAP was proposed, which defines the mean-
ings of the spatial dimension and spatial measure (Han et al . 1998). The spatial dimen-
sion is associated with a geometric entity, which may have different spatial
granularities, such as country, province, and city. A spatial measure is a collection of
pointers for the spatial entities (Han et al . 1998, Bimonte et al . 2010). Thus, the spatial
dimension is similar to a spatial index, whereas the spatial measure is similar to a col-
lection of spatial features. Such a model makes it possible to perform spatial aggrega-
tion functions, such as intersection and union, by means of which a set of geometries
can be returned from the spatial measure (Silva et al . 2008).
OLAP provides multiple methods for implementing data cubes in databases. The
most commonly used methods are the star, snowflake, and fact constellation schemas
(Chaudhuri and Dayal 1997). In the star schema, the data cube is represented as a
star, the center of the star is a fact (i.e. measures in cube cells) table, and the points
surrounding the star consist of dimension tables (Kimball and Ross 2011). Although
the star schema is the simplest implementation of the data cube model in a database,
it cannot explicitly support dimension hierarchies. Therefore, the snowflake schema
was developed to refine the star schema. In the snowflake schema, the dimension
hierarchy can be represented by normalizing the dimension tables. The fact constella-
tion schema is more flexible because it allows multiple fact tables to share the dimen-
sion tables in a database (Chaudhuri and Dayal 1997). In this manner, it provides the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SCIENCE 1857